RADICALIZING CONSUMPTION IN THE FICTION <br>OF DON DELILLO AND TONI MORRISON<br><br>Mark L. Sample<br><br>INTRODUCTION<br>I would like to begin by recalling an encounter I had several years ago with a piece of American folk art. This encounter crystallized for me two thematic concerns that inspired the lengthy project that follows: on one hand, the unexpected violence lurking in the most innocuous places of American society; and on the other hand, the images and objects of consumer culture which promise fulfillment but only bring about alienation. During a visit to the Museum of American Folk Art in New York City in December 2002, I stumbled across Dustbowl Collage (1989), a haunting painting by the self-taught African-American artist William Hawkins. The focal point of Dustbowl Collage is a tall dark figure, skewed so much by perspective that his stovepipe hat is tiny and his feet enormous. This silhouetted figure is journeying with his even darker shadow across a bleak, chaotic, charcoal landscape. Cutting across the top right-hand corner of the work is a shaft of white, a road perhaps, or simply a ray of light. Pasted into this white paint are several photographs clipped from magazines: a color photograph of a white child running with two puppies and a black-and-white photograph of a family walking down the road, their faces obscured by dabs of Hawkins’s paint, a scene that recalls Dorothea Lange’s photographs of migrant families during the Great Depression. In the top left-hand corner of Dustbowl Collage the ray of light spreads out and engulfs another color photograph culled from a magazine advertisement, a handsome white man and a glamorous white woman on a beach. The woman sits before an easel, painting a landscape, and her picture-in-a-picture-in-a-picture seems to be a negative image of Hawkins’s landscape, raising the stakes in the interplay between races in the painting; white rather than black is the dominant color of the woman’s painting, although a swath of darkness cuts through the middle of the landscape, and whether it is a road, the sea, or something else, we cannot say. <br><br>	After seeing this stunning, nakedly raw painting I began researching the artist behind the work. Born in Kentucky in 1895, William Hawkins was raised on a farm by his maternal grandmother, a strong matriarch who was the illegitimate child of a white landowner and his black housekeeper. In 1916 Hawkins made his way to Columbus, Ohio, and made a living any way he could, working for the Buckeye Steel Casting Company, serving in World War I, running a brothel, driving a truck, and of course, painting. It was not until the 1980s, when Hawkins himself was in his eighties, that his art was “discovered” by a local dealer, who consequently entered one of Hawkins’s paintings into a competition at the Ohio State Fair—a competition Hawkins won (Schwindler, “Somethin’ Pretty?” viii-ix). Soon Hawkins’s art was hanging in galleries in Soho, and Hawkins had become one of the leading figures of “outsider art,” that problematic genre roughly composed of self-taught artists whose marginalized existence lends their works authenticity, not to mention marketability. There is something paternalistic, even imperialistic, about how dealers, critics, and collectors conceive of (and make money from) outsider art, but in the case of Hawkins, the Ricco/Maresca Gallery in New York City, where many of Hawkins’s paintings were first publicly displayed, conscientiously and honestly represented Hawkins and his works. At the very least, this gallery, along with Gary Schwindler, a professor at Ohio University who became Hawkins’s advocate and documentarian during the artist’s later years, provided Hawkins with a broader audience. By the time of Hawkins’s death at age ninety-five in 1990, he had become recognized, in Schwindler’s words, as “one of the pre-eminent self-taught painters on the American art scene,” an artist of “uncommon talent and vision” (“William Hawkins” 41, 45).<br><br>	One of the many fascinating aspects of Hawkins’s art is that despite his illiteracy he signed nearly every painting in big, bright, bold letters with his name, birth place, and birth date: “William L. Hawkins. Born KY. July 27, 1895.” The art critic Lyle Rexer suggests that the chief effect of this signature, which often threatens to overwhelm the painting itself, is that Hawkins sends a message to his audience that “this picture was impossible before I was born” (29). It is a claim of authorship, of ownership; regardless of the network of dealers and galleries that make public viewing of Hawkins’s art possible, it would all be pointless without the painting itself, without Hawkins’s originary efforts. The signature and date are more than a statement of artistic hubris, however. By foregrounding “July 27, 1895” on his paintings, whether the painting is a reworking of Leonardo da Vinci’s Last Supper or a takeoff of an L.L. Bean catalog cover, Hawkins privileges the tail end of the nineteenth century over the date of the painting itself, thus authenticating himself as a witness to the enormous transformations of culture and technology that have marked the twentieth century. The disjunction between Hawkins’s roots and his subject matter is most evident in Robotech A-Team Collage (1987), a Warholesque repetition of images from A-Team and Robotech, two television shows that epitomized popular culture at the time (and, I should add, epitomize the backdrop of globalization against which pop culture appears; the A-Team depicted the adventures of four rogue commandos, soldier of fortune veterans from the American war in Vietnam, while Robotech was a popular Japanese animated television show featuring giant robots, imported to the U.S. by Hasbro, makers of a hugely successful toy line based on the show).<br><br>	With Dustbowl Collage’s allusions to migrancy and scarcity, Hawkins’s painting is obviously about the American Dustbowl, but through his signature Hawkins places this episode of American history within the context of the greater twentieth century, a century that ended, for some Americans, with utopian visions of puppies and beaches and beautiful people. This work simultaneously speaks to two time periods: the Great Depression and the end of the American twentieth century, when the logic of consumer capitalism has essentially triumphed over resistance to that logic. This is the link between Hawkins and the two authors I study here, Don DeLillo and Toni Morrison: all three question the images and aesthetics that generate and reinforce the logic of the “American Dream.” In the case of Hawkins, the art critic Jenifer Borum argues that Hawkins employs a “post-modern anti-aesthetic,” in which each painting is a response to a mass-mediated image. “By appropriating images from a variety of pop-cultural sources—especially newspapers and magazines,” Borum writes, “he framed these images to suit his own purposes” (Maresca and Ricco 123). In Dustbowl Collage, for example, Hawkins poaches an image of upper-class privilege—the white couple relaxing on the shore—from what is likely a liquor advertisement, as Rexer notes in a reexamination of Hawkins as an heir to artists like Robert Rauschenberg and Gerhard Richter (27). Hawkins situates the poached image in a context of racial struggle and isolation, displacing both the image and the couple in the image. Hawkins’s painting thus brings together dialectically-opposed elements of American culture in startling ways, revealing the latent relationship between these elements, namely a relationship between class and race, between leisure and work, confounded by a breakdown in capitalism which forecloses the possibility of work, leaving only desperate migrancy in its wake. Hawkins’s painting is a recovery, then, as much a cultural excavation as an artistic endeavor.<br><br>	William Hawkins was, as Rexer observes, “an emigrant from the rural south to the industrialized north, and economically nomadic” (25). With its lonesome traveler stepping through a wintry landscape, heading out toward the edge of the picture frame, Dustbowl Collage recapitulates this sense of nomadism. It is not a coincidence that nomadism turns out to be a key theme uniting DeLillo’s and Morrison’s works. In The Bluest Eye, for example, Pauline Williams and Cholly Breedlove met in Kentucky and “agreed to marry and go ‘way up north, where Cholly said steel mills were begging for workers” (The Bluest Eye 116). Nomadism likewise appears in DeLillo’s novels, but from an entirely different perspective: economically reassured but no less transient. The opening lines of Players mock middle-class migrancy as a means of personal fulfillment: <br><br>Someone says: “Motels, I like motels. I wish I owned a chain, worldwide. I’d like to go from one to another to another. There’s something self-realizing about that.” (Players 3)<br><br>Whereas Cholly Breedlove seeks work, the anonymous voice in Players speaks of ownership. The gap between the two is extreme, marked by the imperatives of a racist, classist society, but both imagine and submit to a kind of transiency. In Hawkins’s collage, the nomadic figure traverses a landscape of mass culture and pop imagery, and it is the same for DeLillo’s and Morrison’s characters. This is not to equate the life of, say, Pammy Wynant in Players with the drastically different life of Pauline Breedlove in The Bluest Eye. Their histories, experiences, and struggles are nearly irreconcilable; each woman could probably only ever imagine the other in mythic terms, as a racialized Other. But this is precisely what draws me to the fiction of DeLillo and Morrison: there is so much to learn about American culture by looking at how their diverse characters feel equally lost among a landscape dominated by Hollywood magic and the promises of consumer fulfillment found in every advertisement, on every grocery store shelf. <br><br>	At first glance my pairing of DeLillo and Morrison may seem surprising. After all, the two writers are separated by race and gender and even by their sense of history: the legacies of slavery and Reconstruction haunt Morrison’s fiction while the conspiracies of the Cold War permeate DeLillo’s novels.  Studying these two authors side by side should in no way gloss over the very real differences between the two, differences which are deeper and more complex than simple binary oppositions allow: man/woman, black/white, urban/rural, and so on. I would like to outline another approach which will help me more circumspectly delineate the dissimilarities between DeLillo and Morrison—and which will then move me back toward their common ground. In a recent examination of the underlying cultural work of the “narratives of loss and fragmentation” that dominate The Oprah Winfrey Show, Sherryl Wilson briefly turns to the novels of DeLillo and Morrison to illustrates two models of how subjectivity is thought to be constructed in America (S. Wilson 67). In what Wilson calls the “elite” tradition, expounded by critics as different as Christopher Lasch and Fredric Jameson, the self is seen as mediated through “forces external to the individual—technological advance and the mass media—with the effect of producing a free-floating anxiety” marked by a sense of “emptiness, depthlessness, and a lack of agency” (54-55). In the other tradition, which Wilson associates with black American feminism but which emerges from other marginalized cultural movements as well, including gay rights and Latino activism, the self is seen as constructed through “the individual’s lived experiences and his/her relation to important significant others—family and friends” (55). Wilson argues that the novels of DeLillo rehearse the logic of the “elite” version of subjectivity, one which she sees largely confined to white middle class Americans, like Jack Gladney in White Noise. “The ‘white’ in DeLillo’s title,” Wilson slyly speculates, “may be an indication of a white male identity in crisis” as he struggles against mass media-ridden and technology-driven apparatuses that leave him anxious and powerless (71). To flesh out the alternative model of subjectivity, which Wilson ultimately finds more empowering, she turns to Toni Morrison’s Beloved—a novel with several links to Wilson’s larger subject, The Oprah Winfrey Show, not the least of which is Winfrey’s portrayal of the character Sethe in the film adaptation of Morrison’s novel. “The message that Morrison articulates in Beloved,” Wilson suggests, “in many ways echoes that which is argued by some black women scholars; the importance of the past, of one’s community, of the experiences of everyday life” (86).<br><br>	I agree in general with the broad outline of Wilson’s argument; there is a trend in DeLillo’s fiction toward suspicion of modern culture and its alienating effects, while in Morrison’s fiction there is a trend toward recognizing the past and one’s heritage as a means of forging an identity or a community. Indeed, scholarly criticism of the two novelists has often reinforced the sense that these two trends dominate the respective novelists’ work. For example, In the Loop: Don DeLillo and the Systems Novel by Tom LeClair and American Magic and Dread: Don DeLillo’s Dialogue with Culture by Mark Osteen are two impressive works of scholarship concerned with DeLillo’s critique of modern media culture and the institutions that exert influence over individual lives. In the case of Morrison, Paula Gallant Eckard’s Maternal Body and Voice represents a recent work that highlights the emergence of a maternal subjectivity among black patriarchal communities, and the role of history and folklore in sustaining women in these communities. New scholarly projects are appearing, however, which complicate our understanding of DeLillo’s and Morrison’s fiction, opening up new conversations about their novels. A recent notable work that bucks the trend in DeLillo criticism is David Cowart’s The Physics of Language, which takes as its object of study DeLillo’s continuing fascination with discourse, that is, with ideology rendered linguistically in American speech. Taking his title from Father Paulus’s lesson on the “physics of language” in Underworld, Cowart argues that language allows individuals to transcend their background. The power of the word towers over the power of the image, a controversial argument considering DeLillo’s concern with this media-saturated world. “Language, for DeLillo,” Cowart concludes, “is the ground of all making” (210)—a line of thinking that meshes with the alternative construction of subjectivity Wilson valorizes and which she sees as taking place daily in the therapeutic discourse on Oprah. Denise Heinze offers a similarly nuanced reading of Morrison’s novels in The Dilemma of “Double Consciousness,” noting how Morrison’s interests range from the place of the individual within the community to the effects of corporate capitalism on racialized consumers. Morrison’s novels, Heinze observes, continually revisit “the demise of the family…the dehumanizing commodification of romantic love…capitalism as a corrosive and insidious perverter of human worth…modern technology, science, and religion” (12). <br><br>	As for me, I do not see Wilson’s two versions of subjectivity as opposite or mutually exclusive. Indeed, careful consideration of DeLillo’s and Morrison’s works reveals that these authors recognize and analyze both phenomena. DeLillo is closely attuned to historical forces and the problematics of community, and Morrison attacks the dehumanizing effects of Lasch’s “Culture of Narcissism” far more often than is usually recognized. In fact, one might think of the two models of subjectivity simply as different perspectives on a spectrum equally inscribed by postmodernism, and DeLillo and Morrison do not promote these models so much as they dramatize and deconstruct them. The commonplace that DeLillo and Morrison write with a postmodern sensibility hardly needs restating here. Their most demanding novels—say, DeLillo’s Ratner’s Star (1976) or Morrison’s Paradise (1997)—are postmodern in form, and even their more traditionally structured novels employ literary conventions only to subvert them later. In general, their anti-totalizing novels repeatedly challenge the master narratives of history and the dominant institutions of power—hallmarks of postmodern fiction, according to Linda Hutcheon’s overly prescriptive account of postmodernism, A Poetics of Postmodernism. In order to achieve their larger goal, which is to critique orthodox ideology by imagining and writing about the logical extremes inherent in modern American life, DeLillo and Morrison evoke contemporary channels of anxiety and alienation as well as fragmented histories of the past, con-fusing the two models of subjectivity in a way that privileges neither. In short, DeLillo and Morrison share more similarities than their critics and popular audiences would at first acknowledge, and in this project I focus on their shared awareness of the exploitive violence at the heart of mass culture. <br><br>	DeLillo and Morrison are arguably the two most eminent living American novelists, and it is telling that both published first novels within a year of each other—Morrison’s The Bluest Eye in 1970 and DeLillo’s Americana in 1971. This timing affords two contemporaneous yet unique perspectives of the same phenomena: the transformations of American culture as the country moved into its bicentennial years, celebrating two hundred years of more or less democratic values (which is not to say democratic practice) and a free market society. Even the most cursory historicization of these transformations reveals that the early seventies was a critical turning point in American culture. The influential social geographer David Harvey describes it as a “sea change”—a fundamental shift in American cultural, economic, and political practices around 1972. He attributes the shift to a confluence of circumstances: the growing influence of television upon the patterns of daily life (Harvey 61); the burgeoning museum culture of the era and the resulting “commercialization of history” (62); the rise of multinational corporations that transcend state boundaries and national markets (175); and in general, a dramatic quickening of the pace of consumer spending. The sociologist Giovanni Arrighi argues that a key moment occurs when President Nixon takes the United States off the gold standard in 1971. Suddenly the dollar is a free-floating signifier with no referent, other than itself, and America is a virtual economy. Liberated from externally imposed exchange rates, U.S.-based transnational corporations gained a huge competitive advantage over foreign companies, and indeed, over foreign governments as well, fueling the phenomenon now called globalization (Arrighi 308-309). Finally, following the historian Bruce Schulman’s argument in a recently published overview of the decade, we can think about the seventies as a bridge between the sixties and eighties, where the backlash of the civil rights and protest movements of the sixties meets the emerging conservative movements of the high-rolling eighties. The end result by the decade’s close, Schulman observes, is that “Americans concluded that capitalist accumulation was not the enemy of doing good but the vehicle for it” (257).<br><br>	As novelists Toni Morrison and Don DeLillo came of their own during this period, and in this project I focus on their writings from that era. Obviously, then, this project is not meant to be an exhaustive reading of their complete oeuvres. Even among their rich work from the seventies I am quite selective, examining one short story and one novel by DeLillo, and two novels by Morrison. I have settled upon these specific texts for a number of strategic reasons. Especially in the case of DeLillo these texts have been neglected despite their relevancy. The subject of my first chapter, “The Uniforms” (1970), is mostly forgotten by critics; indeed, like DeLillo’s other short stories, it has never been collected and it requires a certain amount of legwork simply to find a copy. Meanwhile Players (1977), which I address in my second chapter, has been overshadowed by DeLillo’s well-received novels of the eighties and nineties, such as White Noise (1985), Libra (1988), and Underworld (1997). In the case of Morrison, one can no longer call her first novel, which I look at in my third chapter, neglected: The Bluest Eye is widely-taught and has been the subject of some very thoughtful critical work, despite the fact that the novel was initially “dismissed, trivialized, misread,” as Morrison puts it in an afterword to the 1993 edition of the novel (Bluest Eye 216). Tar Baby, the last novel Morrison wrote during the seventies and the subject of my final chapter, is arguably her least read and most poorly understood novel, perhaps because its material straddles the white and black world in a way her other novels do not. In any case, Tar Baby has attracted far less critical attention than it deserves, sandwiched as it is between the novels Morrison completed immediately before and after: the (retroactively-chosen) Oprah’s Book Club selection Song of Solomon (1977) and the Pulitzer Prize-winning Beloved (1987). <br><br>	Of course, even if most of these texts were not in some way overlooked by critics and the general population, they would still serve me well as the focus for this project. Novels as different as Players and Tar Baby are ciphers for understanding the tensions of the seventies, which often grew out of the ideological failings of the sixties. The short “The Uniforms” is likewise positioned as a signpost marking entrance into the shifting political, economic, and media terrain of seventies. Even The Bluest Eye, which takes place during the final years of the Great Depression, can be read as critical of contemporary consumer culture; the novel confers upon a child of the forties Morrison’s adult voice and awareness, dissecting mass mediated images of beauty and happiness that have endured to the seventies by examining their sources thirty years earlier. It would not be honest to say that one cannot understand the sea change in American culture during the seventies without reading DeLillo or Morrison. It would be fair to say, however, that the richness and complexities of the seventies come to life in their fiction in a way that highlights what is at stake for the United States in the seventies. These works by DeLillo and Morrison question consumer culture and the dynamic it engenders between subjectivity and violence, by which I mean all of the mundane and extraordinary acts of violence embedded in daily life that we strive to ignore or repress, but which nonetheless shape our lives. In the writings of DeLillo and Morrison we have access to discerning cultural critics’ exploration of the way that the relationship between consumer culture and violence is informed, structured, and amplified by the deep matrix emerging from race, class, and gender categories in America. And especially in “The Uniforms” and Tar Baby these writers map the intersection of violence and consumption onto larger yet less visible issues of global production, exploitation, and revolution. <br><br>	My decoding of the double helix of consumer culture and violence begins with one theme in particular that both writers return to time and time again: the ordinary, the everyday, what DeLillo calls the “radiance of dailiness” (DeCurtis 301). A doll, an apple, a candy bar wrapper, a Coke bottle, a hairstyle, billboards and movie posters—these are all commonplace objects that appear in Morrison and DeLillo’s fiction, and not simply to provide a sense of realism. “In this country,” Morrison told Essence in 1995, “we are judged by how much we can consume: the trinkets we collect and waste” (“World of Toni Morrison”, 224). So often in DeLillo and Morrison’s fiction, these “trinkets,” along with the other day-to-day objects that make up our everyday lives, come under scrutiny. In his 1997 opus Underworld DeLillo introduces a concept that helps explain why the ordinary is so important: the Italian word dietrologia. “It means the science of what is behind something,” explains the Jesuit-educated Nick Shay. “A suspicious event,” he continues, “The science of what is behind an event” (Underworld 280). I propose that an event or even a “trinket” need not be “suspicious” in order to have a secret history behind it. Indeed, one premise of my project is that the most “ordinary” things are mysterious, with origins in hidden undercurrents, fragmented, nearly unrecoverable histories. It is my view that Morrison and DeLillo are dietrologists, practicing a kind of “behindology,” for throughout their fiction the most quotidian of events, situations, and products become suspicious, alienated from their accepted contexts.<br><br>	To match the complexity of the texts I am examining, my reading requires that I cut a broad swath across the cultural landscape, ranging across topics as varied as Modern Art and multinational agribusiness, American history and corporate advertising, political protest and the politics of grieving—and always finding disquieting connections among them all. My reading is necessarily centrifugal, spinning out beyond the texts themselves, for DeLillo and Morrison’s novels are nothing if not exemplaries of Mikhail Bakhtin’s concept of the centrifugal, heterglossian novel, incorporating multiple and contradictory discourses, elevating the low, degrading the high, producing a “deepening of dialogic essence” in the text (Bakhtin 300). Ultimately it is this “dialogic essence” that DeLillo and Morrison put to use in the service of their critique of American culture. Each text not only voices multiform discourses within its pages, each text also speaks to the world outside the text. DeLillo recognizes the dialogic nature of his novels when he explains the source of his short story “The Uniforms.” The story was inspired, DeLillo revealed in 1973, by Weekend (1967), a French New Wave film directed by Jean-Luc Godard, which DeLillo had seen at a neighborhood art cinema in New York City:<br><br>I consider this piece of work [“The Uniforms”] a movie as much as anything else. Not my movie, however. No, the work is an attempt to hammer and nail my own frame around somebody else’s movie. […] What does it all mean, signify, or demonstrate? I guess I was just trying to find one small way in which literature might be less rigid in the sources it uses. Thousands of short stories and novels have been made into movies. I simply tried to reverse the process. Until elastic type is perfected, I submit this mode of work as a legitimate challenge to writers of radical intent. (Appendix 533)<br><br>DeLillo appears to be commenting on innovations in the source material of literature—reworking a movie into a short story, appropriating one form of art for the purposes of another. He recognizes the reciprocal relationship between film and literature and that neither can claim to be originary and primary. But DeLillo makes another point here, one with even greater implications. DeLillo is not writing so much about where literature comes from, but what it can do. He insists that literature can reframe other cultural works, recontextualize them, and impose a new perspective, in effect freeing any piece of art, any cultural artifact from its original moorings. <br><br>	DeLillo then issues an implicit challenge, from one writer to other “writers of radical intent”: to “hammer and nail” their own frames around existing cultural works. In DeLillo’s case, he has consistently and effectively in his novels reframed cinematic works, other genres of literature, brand name advertisements, news headlines, sports discourses, popular music—and in general, has demonstrated an unflinching willingness to explore and linger upon the darker side of American capitalism, which produces these words and images and sounds in infinitely repeated consumable cycles. Toni Morrison never explicitly calls herself a writer of radical intent, but there can be no doubt that she too has successfully mounted in her novels a ongoing and sweeping project to reframe key elements of American consumer culture. “It seems to me,” writes Morrison in an essay called “Rootedness: The Ancestor as Foundation,” “that the best art is political and you ought to be able to make it unquestionably political and irrevocably beautiful at the same time” (“Rootedness” 345). Her art is indeed beautiful and “unquestionably political.” Morrison once explained to an interviewer how the allure of consumer culture affects individuals, an awareness vividly reflected—and politically inflected—in her novels: <br><br>Capitalism feels good. Money feels good. Houses feel good. All that feels good, and it can be a complete substitution for being good. […] But when it becomes a substitute way of living in the world, it can be so seductive that you end up on a journey of quenching a thirst that can never be satisfied. (“World of Toni Morrison”, 224)<br><br>The appetite for consumption is insatiable and in novels like The Bluest Eye and Tar Baby, Morrison engages in a no holds barred judgment of the damage capitalism does, both to those individuals and communities whose tastes are exploited and those individuals and communities whose labor is exploited (and in many instances they are the same individuals and communities). Of course, capitalism always presents itself as a solution to the very problems it creates, an irony certainly not lost on either Morrison or DeLillo. The Frankfurt School critic Walter Benjamin, who was perhaps the first theorist of the daily experience of modern life and whose ghost haunts this project, once observed that “capitalism serves essentially to allay the same anxieties, torments, and disturbances to which the so-called religions offered answers” (Selected Writings 288). Capitalism provides salvation, redemption, sanctification. It possesses no specific theology yet nonetheless pervades all aspects of life. There are no days off from the religion of capitalism, no holidays from Holy Days. Under the providence of capitalism, Benjamin writes, “there is no day that is not a feast day, in the terrible sense that all its sacred pomp is unfolded before us; each day commands the utter fealty of each worshipper” (Selected Writings 288). In the project that follows Don DeLillo and Toni Morrison emerge as two agnostics, questioning the “sacred pomp” that characterizes American culture, radicalizing the acts of consumption that daily punctuate our lives.<br><br><br><br>CHAPTER 1:<br>Brand Name Violence In “The Uniforms”<br><br><br><br>What’s great about this country is that America started the tradition where the richest consumers buy essentially the same things as the poorest. You can be watching TV and see Coca-Cola, and you can know that the President drinks Coke, Liz Taylor drinks Coke, and just think, you can drink Coke, too. A Coke is a Coke and no amount of money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All the Cokes are the same and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President knows it, the bum knows, and you know it. <br><br><br>	- Andy Warhol, The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (100-101)<br><br><br><br>Everyday things represent the most overlooked knowledge.<br><br><br>	- Don DeLillo, Underworld (542)<br><br><br><br><br><br>Don DeLillo’s early novels and uncollected short stories have been largely overshadowed by his later works—the now canonized White Noise (1985), the PEN/Faulkner winner Mao II (1991), and the formidable Underworld (1997), a finalist for the National Book Award. Without a doubt these important novels deserve their honors, but I also believe that DeLillo’s more neglected works from the seventies offer their own rewards to the cultural critic of late twentieth-century American life. In this chapter I look at what I am calling “brand name violence” in an early short story by DeLillo: “The Uniforms,” which was originally published in 1970 in the Carolina Quarterly. “The Uniforms” is the brief, bloody, surreal account of an international band of revolutionaries torturing and murdering their way across the French countryside, all the while spouting anti-capitalist, pseudo-Marxist rhetoric, discussing Hollywood cinema, and shopping. Few authors have so consistently anticipated the directions American culture would take in the last quarter of the twentieth century as DeLillo has, and looking back at “The Uniforms,” we find him already questioning the dynamic between two forces which dramatically shape our world and which are the focus of my project: on one hand, the unexpected violence lurking in the most innocuous places of American life; and on the other, the images and objects of consumer culture which promise fulfillment but only produce alienation. By infusing everyday images and objects with a manifest violence, DeLillo creates what the critic Susan Willis calls “disruptive cultural juxtapositions,” which “dialectically reveal more to us about our own historical moment” (Willis, Primer 42). Willis’s dialectical reading of culture is inspired by Walter Benjamin, whose Arcades Project sought, as he later explained, to understand history not as a “sequence of events like the beads of a rosary” but as a “constellation” of fragmented moments which assumes a different shape from every historical vantage point (Illuminations 263). Thus reading a short story written in 1970 from the viewpoint of the new millennium reveals elements from that text which not only deepen our understanding of that short story but also suggest new ways in which to read the present moment. For my own part, I think about these disruptive cultural juxtapositions as a kind of Benjaminian dialectical image whose structure contains the makings of its own de(con)struction. When magnified under a critical lens, the jarring, often off-putting juxtapositions in “The Uniforms” reveal that beneath the overt violence at the plot level—and there is a lot of it—runs a deeper, darker stream of violence, what might be called the text’s latent violence. Like DeLillo’s concept of “latent history” in Great Jones Street (1973), the latent violence of “The Uniforms” deals with “events that almost took place, events that definitely took place but remained unseen and unremarked on […], and events that probably took place but were definitely not chronicled” (Great Jones Street 75). My reading of “The Uniforms” is in fact a recovery of the latent violence and latent history that flow almost-but-not-quite beyond the margins of the text. I argue that through the barely suppressed, nearly forgotten violence of exploitation and cultural imperialism DeLillo encodes a sense of historical specificity into “The Uniforms” that the terrorists in the story themselves struggle to deny. <br><br>	Written in a masterful deadpan, “The Uniforms” concludes with the revolutionaries poised to liberate a banana factory in the French countryside. Never mind for a moment which is more absurd: that bananas are produced in a factory, or that such a factory is located in rural France. It does not matter to the revolutionaries. And that is the point. These guerillas are not heroic outlaws of the kind Eric Hobsbawm memorializes in his classic study Bandits, champions of the poor and the downtrodden, fighting injustice at the hands of the aristocracy or the state. Hobsbawm focuses primarily on social banditry in the pre-industrial world, but he speculates that as long as there exists the dream of freedom and justice there will be room for the bandit-hero in the modern post-industrial world (112-113). DeLillo would appear to disagree. Very quickly—as we witness the revolutionaries rape and torture a string of innocent victims while they simultaneously discuss the merits of different Hollywood directors—we realize that the guerillas are not Marxist revolutionaries committed to the overthrow of capitalism, but simply sadistic terrorists, heroes to no one but themselves, obsessed with brand names, fashion, and filmmaking—in short, with the power of the image.	<br><br>A BLACK MILITANT<br>Of the five terrorists in the group it is the American, Bradley, whose perspective drives the narrative of “The Uniforms.” Fancying himself the “giver of names,” Bradley spends much of his time coming up with nicknames for his comrades rooted in pop culture. “Wonder Bread” is Bradley’s incongruous name for the vaguely Arabic Hassan, while he calls Jean-Claude “Breathless,” a reference to the 1960 Godard film staring Jean-Paul Belmondo (“Uniforms” 451). Duong is “Spider God,” an enigmatic name that, like everything else in the terrorists’ world, has more to do with style than substance. Throughout the story Bradley and the other terrorists demonstrate what I am calling a cinematic sensibility—a director’s appreciation for what looks good on film, an eye for striking poses and stylized designs. The only woman in the group, whom Bradley dubs “Harlow,” is a ruthless beauty tutored in the revolutions of Algiers, Bolivia, Indochina, and, inexplicably, the Cannes film festival. Like all of the terrorists in the story, she dons a uniform more for its dramatic effect than for any practical reason, wearing an Apache headband, an old British army tunic, and chinos. “She looked good,” Bradley reflects, “with the Sten gun across her lap as she sat on a rock eating” (451). What “looked good” is as much the pose as the girl herself; her uniform is a costume and the Sten gun a prop. Hassan too reenacts an iconic image lifted from a Hollywood war movie, wearing a “red beret, a khaki fatigue jacket and pants, and a pair of combat boots.” And the final touch: he held a Wehrmacht Kar 43 semi-automatic weapon and “bandoliers crisscrossed his chest.” Adding to the surrealism of DeLillo’s story, Hassan wears this outfit not to one of the terrorists’ senseless attacks, but to a picnic they share; in addition to the predictable semi-automatic, he carried some “food with him and they had a good lunch of soup, meat, fresh fruit and two kinds of wine” (453). <br><br>	In this kind of mini-United Nations gone bad, the only character missing for Bradley—cinematically speaking—is a “black militant” from the States, preferably one “who had played some sandlot baseball” (452). This “badly needed” black figure would compensate for Jean-Claude’s embarrassingly “girlish” tosses of Molotov cocktails. “The awkwardness of Jean-Claude’s tosses,” DeLillo writes, “had always bothered Bradley [...] and Bradley couldn’t help questioning the revolutionary capabilities of soccer-playing people who threw explosive devices so awkwardly” (452). Such tosses simply do not look like what Bradley, whose vision is shaped—and limited—by the cinema, expects them to. Bradley later elaborates upon this fantasy comrade of his, wishing for “a lean ungrammatical athletic type who wore dark glasses and a loose-fitting dashiki shirt” (457). Nearly every word of Bradley’s description invokes a stereotype, but that is hardly the most troubling aspect of this passage. Coded in this and other descriptions of Bradley’s ideal black comrade we encounter the first traces of “latent violence” in DeLillo’s story. Bradley’s synthesis of two racial stereotypes, the violent black male and the naturally talented black athlete, foregrounds what Toni Morrison in Playing in the Dark calls an “Africanist presence” in the text—a “dark and abiding presence that moves the hearts and texts of American literature with fear and longing” (Playing in the Dark 33). This Africanist presence often lurks on the margins of texts, functioning as the unarticulated referent anchoring the text, the disavowed double around which whiteness is constructed. <br><br>	DeLillo uses Bradley to establish an explicit Africanist presence in “The Uniforms,” foregrounding the centrality of race in twentieth century political discourse. Of course, any mention of a “black militant” in the late sixties or early seventies conjures up images of the Black Panthers—Bobby Seale, Huey Newton, Eldridge Cleaver—but unlike these figures or other Civil Rights leaders of the era—charismatic men like Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, or even Muhammad Ali—Bradley hopes for the strong, silent type, or even something both more and less than silent—“ungrammatical.” There are two ways of understanding this word “ungrammatical,” and neither suggests that Bradley has a sophisticated understanding of political discourse. Either “ungrammatical” describes how Bradley thinks these eloquent Civil Rights leaders speak—with powerfully evocative but ultimately ungrammatical English; or else Bradley wants a comrade who is less articulate than these black men, who is, in fact, less than articulate, a man without a voice, with whom words have no purpose, no meaning, no relation to his own will. In either case, Bradley’s wish for a black militant is not made in the spirit of racial inclusion, but as a selfish imposition of Bradley’s cinematic sensibility upon the forces of racial difference. More importantly, Bradley’s imaginary, ungrammatical militant functions as a preemptive silencing of an Africanist presence that, were it not confined to the realm of Bradley’s fantasy, would threaten to overwhelm the white terrorists with a historical force that would reveal the emptiness of their own revolutionary politics.<br><br>	Bradley’s fantasy black man would give the band of terrorists the same mismatched demographic makeup as an embattled infantry unit in one of the war movies they admire, but more than anything the “black militant” represents a paradoxical wish for style and authenticity. I say “paradoxical,” because style is often understood as contrary to authenticity; the more stylish one is, the less authentic, the less true to one’s own self. A black man would resolve this contradiction for the terrorists. Jean-Claude, the theorist of the group, had declared that “the revolutionary uniform must be tight and spare” because this style has cinematic appeal (454). Bradley, however, finds it acceptable, even fitting, for “blacks to wear loose uniforms because their struggle was less lyrical and they had the Afro thing going for them as well” (457). The colorful West African dashiki shirt, the “Afro thing”—these things signify, even if Bradley does not understand the cultural forces at work, a natural aesthetic rooted in the physical landscape, in which Africa is the final referent. The Afro is the opposite of the lye-straightened conk that Malcolm X critiques in his autobiography as his “first really big step toward self-degradation: when I endured all of that pain, literally burning my flesh to have it look like a white man’s hair” (Haley and X 64). Understood this way, the Afro opposes both artifice and Europeanness. In “Black Hair/Style Politics,” however, Kobena Mercer reminds us that even if the Afro attempts to forge a link to Africa, “there was nothing particularly African about the Afro at all. Neither style [the Afro or dreadlocks] had a given reference point in existing African culture, in which hair is rarely left to grow ‘naturally’” (256). Nevertheless in the late sixties the Afro—along with the dashiki—became, for a time, a symbol of black power and black pride, that is, until it was commercialized, available to anyone in the form of an Afro wig and lampooned in Blaxploitation films. “Cut off from its original political contexts,” Mercer comments, “it became just another fashion” (255). This is no doubt how Bradley understands “the Afro thing.” To his cinematic eye, the dashiki and Afro signify a romanticized revolutionary chic, the perfect balance of style and authenticity. <br><br>	The final irony of the phantom black militant in “The Uniforms” is that he—whose “struggle was less lyrical”—would legitimate the violence sown by the terrorists. Race, in short, is a sanction for the terrorists’ violence in Bradley’s mind. Bradley imagines an Africanist presence precisely so that it can be contained and reframed according to the terrorists’ own ideology—which is an ideology of mindless violence. The violence exists in a historical void; there is an enduring and powerful will to amnesia in the terrorists’ ideology. Whether it was lyrical or not, the struggle for Civil Rights was perhaps the true revolution of the sixties and early seventies, and anything from that movement with any resonance, the sit-ins, the National Guard escorting students to school, dogs and fire hoses in Birmingham, murders in Mississippi, riots in Watts and Detroit, is distilled and abstracted into the fantasy projection of an inarticulate baseball player with an Afro, an image that might as well be lampooned in the Blaxploitation films of the seventies. In Bradley’s conflation of struggle and style, repression and culture, there is a profound misunderstanding of African-American history, which is not unlike the terrorists’ misreading of other historical forces at work in their world. <br><br>	The ridiculousness of Bradley’s approach to terrorism, his misplaced emphasis on style over politics, underscores an observation Mark Osteen makes in American Magic and Dread. Offering the most sustained critical engagement to date of DeLillo’s early works, Osteen argues that “DeLillo’s early fictions employ cinematic allusions and techniques to reveal the harmful effects of cinematic representation on subjectivity” (3). Osteen points out that the terrorists’ discussions of history are in fact nothing more than film school debates about the cinematography of war movies. They admire the American Civil War films of John Ford and John Huston for their use of “tight dusty uniforms,” and they argue whether Resnais used footage of actual bomb victims in Hiroshima mon amour (“Uniforms” 454-455). Recalling the 1968 protests in Prague, Jean-Claude “gave his version of what had happened there and why so much of the [newsreel] footage seemed overexposed” (452). Like Bradley’s insistence that because blacks had “the Afro thing going for them” they were somehow better equipped to lead revolutions, these discussions of costumes, special effects, and lighting are substitutes for even a superficial acquaintance with historical realities, let alone a true understanding of historical forces and trends. Despite their stated goal—the liberation of a banana factory—DeLillo’s revolutionaries are more interested in questions of film production than in the questions of production in the Marxist sense of word. This cinematic sensibility of the terrorists has, according to Osteen, “blurred the distinction between [political] commitment and celebrity, between reality and representations” (15). <br><br>	And more importantly, I would add, this cinematic understanding of the world categorically negates history. Their countless historical allusions have no depth, no defining contextual structure to them. Consider this short passage, in which DeLillo lists what each of the terrorists is doing at the same precise moment:<br><br>1)	Harlow put on one of the nylon masks. <br>2)	Jean-Claude chanted MAO-CHE-HO. <br>3)	Hassan loaded the Ruger 10/22 carbine.<br>4)	Bradley tried to decide between the handmade moccasins and the Tobruk desert boots.<br>5)	Duong played a Judy Collins record. (“Uniforms” 455)<br><br>Jean-Claude’s chant—“MAO-CHE-HO”—rehearses the sound of revolutionary discourse, but the words themselves mean nothing. They are, like Warhol’s Mao series or the endless reproductions of Che Guevara’s face, at best incantations of celebrity and at worst, floating signifiers, detached from their historical source, emptied of content. DeLillo’s textual montage flattens the terrorists’ political statements onto the same plane as their fashion statements (such as Bradley’s footwear dilemma)—in effect equating them. Style is all that matters to the terrorists, whether it is politics or fashion, and both are nothing more than a pastiche, an early symptom of the same phenomenon Fredric Jameson would later decry as “a neutral practice […] without any of parody’s ulterior motives, amputated of the satiric impulse, devoid of laughter and of any conviction” (Jameson 17). Jameson may be underestimating the power of pastiche, of course; DeLillo employs it here precisely to inject “The Uniforms” with irony and satire.<br><br>	Osteen notes that Bradley and his companions only invoke ideology as an excuse to rape and murder innocent suburbanites in the French countryside (14). Yet even as the terrorists are cold-hearted killers deluding themselves with visions of revolution, they possess a paradoxical innocence. The terrorists move with ease through the world, untouched by the destruction they cause. After a morning of rape and torture, for example, they spend an afternoon window-shopping. The hypocrisy of their pseudo-Marxism is all too obvious. Later the terrorists lovingly sift through Bradley’s “collection of money-saving coupons for Maxim, Crest, Dial, Lucky Strike, Comet, Sylvania and Buick Electra.” As Bradley “spread the coupons on the table […] they all looked at them, admiring the bright colors” (454). These coupons do not merely signal the terrorists’ complicity and participation in consumer culture; what they represent are not the soaps and cigarettes, televisions and automobiles for which they may be redeemed, but something far more abstract. There is something psychologically appealing about the “bright colors”—the packaging and marketing of these commodities—that is independent of the use value of the commodities themselves. DeLillo highlights here the presence of what Raymond Williams calls the “magic system” of advertising, that “highly organized and professional system of magical inducements and satisfactions, functionally very similar to magical systems in simpler societies, but rather strangely coexistent with a highly developed scientific technology” (335). The terrorists, more so than most consumers, seem entranced by and beholden to this magic system.<br><br>	The terrorists spend the night before their big raid on the banana factory pulling costumes out of a steamer trunk, trying on colorful, “uniforms” in front of a full-length mirror: a red fez there, an orange and green Hawaiian shirt there, a football jersey for Bradley, and so on. Osteen comments that the unusual outfits worn by the terrorists are extensions of the world of pure surface that characterizes late capitalism—what Jameson describes in terms of pastiche. I agree with Osteen, but I want to emphasize that the uniforms are not merely a pastiche of commodities, but a pastiche of commodities from different times and different places, a pastiche of history. Just as the terrorists are ignorant of their own politics and complicity in a system of oppression and violence, they are ignorant of the historical roots of the very clothes they fetishize. Quite simply, these are individuals who have no sense of the past or the future, true Jamesonian postmodern subjects. This reading of the story accounts for the puzzling ending, which leaves the terrorists poised to strike the banana factory:<br><br>Federal troops ringed the banana factory. Six halftracks were positioned outside the front entrance. The troops looked foolish in their identical oversized helmets, gas masks and baggy trousers. Duong cut the wire and they moved slowly toward the lights. Many would die that night, but they would not. They would live until the end and even beyond. (459)<br><br>The terrorists clearly imagine themselves to be invincible, heroes who would never die, who would, like their favorite movie stars preserved forever on celluloid, “live until the end and even beyond.” In the face of troops and tanks this denial of death is more than naïveté, it is a renunciation of history, of causes and effects, of pasts and futures. It is an insistence that history does not matter, indeed, that history does not even exist.<br><br>THE BANANA COMPANY<br>This explanation—that history does not exist for the terrorists—illuminates another mystery in “The Uniforms”: the French banana factory whose existence I have labeled absurd. It is tempting to dismiss the banana factory in “The Uniforms” as a Hitchcockian MacGuffin, a missing object whose only purpose is to set the story in motion. A statuette, a cigarette lighter, a deadly secret—Hitchcock used these things as pretexts to begin his suspense films. Might the banana factory function in the same way, a clever plot device, something around which the terrorists organize their activities but which is ultimately beside the point? When François Truffaut asked Hitchcock to explain the MacGuffin, Hitchcock replied:<br><br>It might be a Scottish name, taken from a story about two men in a train. One man says, “What’s that package up there in the baggage rack?” And the other answers, “Oh that’s a MacGuffin.” The first one asks, “What’s a MacGuffin?” “Well,” the other man says, “It’s an apparatus for trapping lions in the Scottish Highlands.” The first man says, “But there are no lions in the Scottish Highlands,” and the other one answers, “Well then, that’s no MacGuffin!” So you see a MacGuffin is nothing at all. (Truffaut 138)<br><br>“A MacGuffin is nothing at all”: a disingenuous response, and one we should distrust. In The Sublime Object of Ideology, Slavoj Žižek interprets the MacGuffin as “the purest case of what Lacan calls objet petit a: a pure void which functions as the object-cause of desire. […] A cause which in itself does not exist—which is present only in a series of effects, but always in a distorted, displaced way” (163). Žižek’s pseudo-psychoanalytic reading is appealing, sexy even in its poststructuralist discourse, but fundamentally wrong. He denies what the anthropologist Igor Kopytoff calls “the cultural biography of things,” the very real, material conditions of a given object, how it is “endowed with culturally specific meanings, and classified and reclassified into culturally constituted categories” (68). The banana factory in “The Uniforms” is no fantasy object of deferred desire. Neither is the mention of bananas a whimsical gesture or a trivial “nothing at all” as Hitchcock would have it. As I am about to demonstrate, DeLillo’s use of bananas as a culturally specific signifier—and commodity—contributes to his overall critique of both the terrorists and the bourgeoisie in “The Uniforms.” <br><br>	The first reference to bananas occurs when the terrorists encounter a well-to-do man and woman whose car has broken down along the side of the road. Jean-Claude questions the man about “whether he’d rather eat bananas picked by oppressed workers or spend a night in a bed full of tarantulas.” At that point the man stoically “took out an expensive handkerchief, tied it over his eyes and said bananas” (452-453). Jean-Claude promptly shoots the man. Here the terrorists dramatically acknowledge the realities of banana production: bananas are not produced in factories, they are harvested by agricultural laborers, and the laborers are caught in a web of economic and social oppression, in which tarantulas are the least of their troubles. This scene begs a question that DeLillo leaves unanswered: who is worse, the ruthless terrorist or the proud bourgeoisie who would rather die than reflect upon the economic system which delivers a ridiculously affordable tropical fruit to his local grocer? In the surreal world of “The Uniforms” both parties are blameworthy.<br><br>	The night before their climactic raid the terrorists refer to their target as a “banana company,” an ambiguous term that shifts the emphasis away from the “oppressed workers” yet does not quite signify the “factory” the terrorists end up assaulting. In a different context—in other words, in a realistic narrative—the “banana company” could only refer to a multinational company that grows, ships, and distributes bananas. And in 1970, there was only one such company: the notorious United Fruit Company, now known more congenially as Chiquita Brands International. It is difficult to overestimate the United Fruit Company’s influence upon the geopolitical and social fabric of Latin America, where Chiquita still owns approximately 90,000 acres of land and leases 50,000 more. The United Fruit Company’s egregious activities in Latin America, including its crucial role in the CIA-backed overthrow of the democratically elected president of Guatemala in1954, have been well-documented. So it appears that the terrorists have at least a rudimentary understanding of the banana company’s role in a system of economic oppression and exploitation; they know enough, that is, to want to blow it up.<br><br>	It is only with the final mention of bananas in “The Uniforms” that the terrorists’ misunderstanding of history and social relations is fully revealed. This is the transformation of the banana company to the “banana factory” the terrorists finally attack. What an intriguing sliding of signification, from oppressed worker, to anonymous company, to, in the final paragraph, a full-fledged factory, similar to the industrial Renault factory described in the opening lines of “The Uniforms.” It is as if the agricultural roots of banana production are ultimately denied, and bananas become like any other commodity, mass-produced on an assembly line. Of course, in a very real way bananas are mass-produced (but not on an assembly line per se), and for most consumers in developed nations, bananas do magically appear on their supermarket shelves, just as automobiles magically appear in dealer lots. The United Fruit Company was largely responsible for this magic.<br><br>	The banana is now so ubiquitous, so ordinary that modern Americans forget it was an exotic fruit in the first half of the twentieth century. So uncommon was the banana that in 1944 United Fruit launched an advertising campaign educating consumers on how to eat and store bananas. For this campaign United Fruit created “Miss Chiquita,” quite possibly one of the most paradoxical corporate mascots ever imagined. Originally drawn by Dik Browne, the creator of “Hagar the Horrible,” Miss Chiquita was a feminized yet bizarrely phallic cartoon banana wearing a fruit-bowl hat, inspired in part by the popular Brazilian singer and actress Carmen Miranda (who was in fact born in Portugal and retained her Portuguese passport throughout her life). With her long eyelashes, suggestive red lipstick, and racy flamenco dress, Miss Chiquita embodies a highly sexualized, flirtatious Latina subject. Yet she is also infantilized, bearing the name “Chiquita,” the diminutive form of the Spanish noun chica, or little girl. There is no doubt that the simultaneous eroticization and infantilization of Miss Chiquita reflected dominant North American attitudes toward Latin America at the time—inaccessible yet irresistible, alluring yet forbidden—and it is not implausible to claim that Miss Chiquita is Latin America as the region appears in the imagination of consumers in the United States. That is, as a country ripe for the picking, figuratively and literally. In this way Latin American is the orient of the Americas, more an abstract idea than a real place. <br><br>	In the original radio and television spots from the forties, Miss Chiquita sings her famous jingle backed by a Latin rhythm section: <br><br>I’m Chiquita banana and I’ve come to say <br>Bananas have to ripen in a certain way<br>When they are fleck’d with brown and have a golden hue <br>Bananas taste the best and are best for you <br>You can put them in a salad <br>You can put them in a pie-aye <br>Any way you want to eat them <br>It’s impossible to beat them <br>But, bananas like the climate of the very, very tropical equator <br>So you should never put bananas in the refrigerator<br><br>This instructional song is a strong indicator of how foreign bananas were to the United States public in the first half of the twentieth century. Miss Chiquita answers the basic questions about bananas: how to tell when they are ripe, how to serve them, and how to store them. Through Miss Chiquita the United Fruit Company became, as the Chiquita corporate website proudly declares, “the first company to brand a banana.” When every banana looks and tastes the same—and they usually do—nobody’s banana stands out. Branding gave United Fruit a way to distinguish its bananas from those of its competitors. This branding reached its full potential in 1963 with the introduction of the Chiquita banana sticker, placed by hand on every bunch of bananas, a practice continued today.<br><br>	But by whose hand? This is the question Susan Willis wants to ask in a brief analysis of banana stickers, part of a larger argument on William Faulkner’s As I Lay Dying. Willis holds that the logo stickers—whether Chiquita, Dole, or Del Monte—function as an easily digestible (not literally, of course) explanation of the production and distribution of bananas. The sticker “suggests that the multinational [corporation] made each banana possible. The logo is emblematic of production without revealing anything specific about production” (Primer 52). The plantation laborers, the dock workers, the stock boys, everybody involved in the elaborate process of getting a bunch of bananas from, say, Tenguel-Balao, Ecuador, to a SuperFresh in Philadelphia disappears, and in their place stands a faceless multinational conglomerate, whose essence is reduced to a colorful, fun sticker. The terrorists’ slippage from “oppressed worker” on a plantation to “factory” where bananas are produced thus reenacts the same logic of a banana sticker. The banana, it turns out, is an unlikely example of what Marx calls a “social hieroglyph,” a commodity constituted of congealed labor and veiled social relations. DeLillo’s use of the banana as the pretext for the terrorists’ adventure now turns out to be an ingenious move, for it allows him to obliquely critique the tendency to disavow the actual means of production of a commodity, even after an initial acknowledgment of these means. <br><br>I will now turn to another commodity in “The Uniforms” that also possesses a rich “cultural biography,” but first it is important to revisit briefly Osteen’s argument regarding cinematic representation in DeLillo’s early works. When “The Uniforms” was reprinted in 1973, DeLillo added a note in which he confessed that the story was inspired by the 1967 Godard film Weekend. “After seeing this film for the first and only time,” DeLillo recalls, <br><br>I walked the two or so miles from the theater where it was playing to the monochromatic street I live on and immediately set to work remaking what I’d seen and heard. Took out the boring parts. Added a few brand names. Two sittings later I had “The Uniforms.” It was right there before me in black-and-white with my name above the title. (Appendix 533)<br><br>Twenty years later DeLillo reaffirmed the link between French New Wave cinema and his own writing, telling me that “The Uniforms” is a story he “more or less flung onto the page after seeing a Godard film” (DeLillo, Letter to the author). Excavating other elements of Godard in DeLillo’s work, Osteen cites DeLillo’s first novel, Americana (1971). There the filmmaker David Bell refers to himself as “a child of Godard and Coca-Cola” (Americana 269). Osteen points out that this phrase is a reformulation of Godard’s famous placard in Masculin féminin (1966)—“children of Marx and Coca-Cola”—which summarizes Godard’s characters’ “uneasy allegiance to both leftist politics and to pop-cultural images” (Osteen 11). Osteen offers an excellent reading of the Godard side of David Bell’s self-professed genealogy, demonstrating how indebted to cinema DeLillo’s early works are, but he neglects the Coca-Cola side of DeLillo’s “Godard and Coca-Cola” lineage. I would like to redress this gap now, for it is through the icon of Coca-Cola that DeLillo voices his most radical thematic concerns in “The Uniforms.”<br><br>	Like the banana, Coke now functions as a universal signifier, with a take-it-for-grantedness few commodities can rival. Except for the nasty, brutish life of “New Coke,” whose only value was to transform regular Coke into a “classic,” Coca-Cola seems ahistorical. For most consumers, it always was, always is, and always shall be. I want to build a case, however, that it is through Coca-Cola that DeLillo most forcefully evokes a “disruptive cultural juxtaposition” that enriches his critique of consumer culture, specifically by breaking what I am calling the spell of the ordinary that surrounds everyday objects. I am mindful here of Father Paulus’s counsel to Nick Shay in Underworld. “Everyday things represent the most overlooked knowledge,” the Jesuit priest warns his troubled student, an admonition that I have taken to heart as I strive to understand what the Jesuit calls “the depth and reach of the commonplace” (Underworld 542). To this end I turn my attention to a seemingly insignificant detail in “The Uniforms” that has shaped my thinking about both this story and other works by DeLillo, the striking image of the “four molotovs in the Coke sixpack” (458) which appears several times throughout the story.<br><br>	The image first appears when DeLillo notes that “Jean-Claude had brewed several molotovs after dinner and he carried these in a Coca-Cola sixpack” (452). Later the terrorists throw one of the Molotovs at a security checkpoint and another at an army tank that has come to put down the terrorists’ revolution. At the end of the story the terrorists are poised to attack the banana factory in the name of “liberating” it and DeLillo takes inventory of their weapons: they carried<br><br>the Sten gun, four grenades, a Thompson submachine gun, a machette, an ivory-handled Colt .45, the blowtorch, the bowie knife, a Remington six-shooter, a twelve-gauge sawed-off shotgun, a pair of barbed wire cutters, a 7.65mm Belgian automatic, a bolo knife, a lever-action Winchester, and four molotovs in the Coke sixpack. (459)<br><br>Coca-Cola is undoubtedly one of the brand names DeLillo added to his retelling of Weekend, one I am sure he chose quite deliberately, for the history of Coca-Cola, as Mark Pendergrast proclaims in For God, Country, and Coca-Cola, is “emblematic of the best and worst of American and Western Civilization. [...] [It is] a microcosm of American history” (11). Think for a moment about the humble Coke bottle, that iconic, lovely curved glass container. With its familiar “hobbleskirt” design, first patented in 1915 by a designer in the heart of America, at the Root Glass Company in Terre Haute, Indiana, the Coca-Cola bottle is recognizable around the world for its shape, color, markings, and of course, its ubiquity. In a seminal essay in the field of American material culture studies, Craig Gilborn catalogs some of the elements that have led to the Coke bottle’s enormous success as both a packaging design and a marketing concept: the bottles are “inexpensive, expendable, durable, and possess sculptural and optical qualities of great complexity” (Gilborn 185). “The bottle,” Gilborn continues from the naïve perspective of 1968, “unlike most other objects which might be regarded as symbols par excellence of American culture, is singularly free of anxiety-producing associations” (Gilborn 190). <br><br>	This is and was not entirely the case, of course, even in 1968. I want to consider a constellation of Coke bottles, in which DeLillo’s Molotovs are one star among many. Consider Robert Rauschenberg’s 1958 combine, Coca-Cola Plan. Incorporating painting, sculpture, and found objects, this important work anticipates the Pop Art movement of the sixties and makes a strong statement, I argue, about the role of American culture in a global context. The combine features three empty Coke bottles, dripping with paint but still plainly Coke bottles, in a wooden crate flanked by a pair of cast-metal wings. One would be hard-pressed to claim that Coca-Cola Plan is “free of anxiety-producing associations.” The bottom third of the crate contains a wood newel cap, blackened, or burnt perhaps, and the top third is devoted to a sketched plan from which the title of the piece derives. But it is not self-evident that the sketch is the plan for the piece itself; it may be the plan for another, unidentified work. Underneath the sketch is the following text:<br><br>PLAN<br>Lay out stretcher on floor<br>Match markings and join<br><br>In a Guggenheim retrospective of Rauschenberg’s work, Susan Davidson writes that the fusion of two-dimensional painting and three-dimensional sculpture “establishes a dynamic between everyday existence and aesthetic concerns” (Hopps 100). Certainly this dynamic exists, but surely the concerns of this piece are more than aesthetic. The critic Marco Livingstone sees an un-ironic “classical grandeur” in the winged combine, the “modern equivalent of an ancient stele” (Livingstone 24). The art historian Mary Lynn Kotz interprets the three bottles as a “heart between a pair of wings, reminiscent of the goddess’s spread wings in the Nike of Samothrace” (Kotz 91). <br><br>	According to these interpretations, Coca-Cola Plan is celebratory, a commemoration of a great American icon. I am not so quick to see elements of Greek or Roman mythology in this piece; if there is any mythology present, it is a decidedly American one, and, according to my reading, there is little to celebrate. I contend that the wings are not the wings of an angel or a goddess; they are the outstretched wings of an eagle, reminiscent of the American bald eagle on the Great Seal of the United States. According to the original design in 1782 by Charles Thomson, this eagle should appear “on the Wing & rising”—that is, fierce and ready for attack (Hunt 34). If we were to overlay the Great Seal onto Coca-Cola Plan, lining up the two sets of eagle’s wings, we would find that in the same space where the text of the “plan” appears there is, clenched in the eagle’s beak on the Great Seal, a scroll emblazoned with the national motto E Pluribus Unum. This motto—“Out of Many, One”—is a reference to the union of the original thirteen states, but it is also an expression of assimilation and incorporation, the elimination of difference. When Rauschenberg’s piece is seen this way, as a quotation of the Great Seal, the newel cap begins to look suspiciously like a scorched globe and the “plan” now appears to be one of world domination, calling for stretchers (for the dead) and forced unification (match markings and join), a kind of New World Order (a Novus Ordo Seclorum) lorded over by a triumvirate of winged Coke bottles. “How might archaeologists of a future millennium use the [Coke] bottle in reconstructing the events and forces of the twentieth century?” asks Gilborn in his 1968 essay (191). As evidence of cultural imperialism, we might answer, in which Coca-Cola—and America by extension—ruthlessly establishes a world empire.<br><br>	Curfew, another Rauschenberg combine from 1958, is even more cryptic than Coca-Cola Plan. Now in the private collection of media mogul David Geffen, Curfew is composed of “oil, paper, fabric, wood, engraving, printed reproductions, and printed paper on canvas and wood, with four Coca-Cola bottles, bottle cap, and unidentified debris” (Hopps 129). In this dense patchwork of “unidentified debris” there are only three readily discernible images, and excepting the four Coke bottles in the upper left of the combine, even these are ambiguous. Below the bottles is a disturbing drawing of a stag and a hound, and it is unclear whether the stag is the prey or the attacker. Both animals look tormented, and the barking dog seems to cower in submission. Part of the stag’s head is cut off, painted over by Rauschenberg, leaving only a salivating muzzle in the frame. To the right of the Coke bottles, forming a triangle with the stag and hound, is a blurred image of a nondescript cat, sitting Cheshire-style. The only clue to the combine’s meaning is its title: Curfew. The connotations here are of martial law, a police state, a curtailing of rights and freedoms, all in the name of order. And Rauschenberg implicates Coca-Cola with the curfew. There is a profound tension between order and chaos in the piece, and chaos seems to be prevailing. The four Coke bottles—solid, identifiable, dependable—compete against the two enigmatic images, and the triangle they form appears to be a last-ditch effort to impose order on the piece. It nearly fails, as does the curfew. Rauschenberg seems to raise the question of which is worse: a nominal search for order which fails, or search for order which leaves only Coca-Cola and pop culture in control? In either case, the excitement, the thrill, the pause that refreshes all signified by Coke assume an Orwellian element in this work. <br><br>	Other ambiguous representations of Coca-Cola bottles prior to 1970 worth mentioning are Andy Warhol’s 210 Coca-Cola Bottles (1962) and his Green Coca-Cola Bottles (1962). Both of these silkscreens show row after row of identical bottles, with only a slight variation in hue in the hundreds of bottles. Quite correctly, I think, Sidra Stich sees these pieces as a commentary on conformity and Coca-Cola’s hegemony:<br><br>Though the appearance of a successful brand-name product seemingly proclaims the superiority of America’s commercial free-enterprise system, Warhol’s paradoxical depictions show that this system also produces monopolistic uniformity and regimentation rather than competitive diversity and freedom. (93)<br><br>	So overpowering is the drive to uniformity in the world of Coca-Cola that we can find traces of it in officially sanctioned representations of Coke. I am thinking here of the famous “I’d like to buy the world a Coke” advertising campaign. Although the 1971 commercial—called the “Hilltop” commercial—was just over a year away when DeLillo wrote “The Uniforms,” it is not fanciful to suppose that his short story was a reflection upon cultural patterns and trajectories he discerned in the zeitgeist, the same patterns which led to the “Hilltop” commercial. Produced by McCann-Erickson, the commercial featured an international cast of hundreds of youths, all clothed in their respective traditional dress, singing on a hilltop in Italy. Their song was one of union, celebrating community and harmony—and of course, celebrating Coke:<br><br>I’d like to buy the world a home and furnish it with love, <br><br>Grow apple trees and honey bees, and snow white turtle doves. <br>I’d like to teach the world to sing in perfect harmony, <br>I’d like to buy the world a Coke and keep it company.<br><br>With its pastoral imagery and utopian aspirations for world peace, the commercial resonated with a nation dealing with the seemingly endless Vietnam War and the social and racial upheaval of the sixties. The “Hilltop” commercial was an instant hit and it became one of the most fondly remembered advertising campaigns in the history of television.<br><br>	Taking a cue from Stuart Hall, who proposes that cultural critics engage in the political struggle for signification by performing “oppositional readings” of cultural messages, I offer here a brief contrary reading to the “Hilltop” commercial (Hall 103). It appears that the multiracial, multiethnic youth sing in one voice (and in one language—English), a collective “I” who transfigures Coke into the solution for a New World Order. But it is a world order which is only slightly more enlightened than the one envisioned by Coca-Cola Plan. The “I” is not really the singers, but Coca-Cola itself, and the wish is not to “buy the world a Coke,” but to sell it one. The commercial supposes that drinking Coke is enough to induce a state of pastoral serenity, and, if that does not work, then at least Coke-as-brand name can function as a signifier shared across cultures, binding them together. In either case, there is something vaguely disturbing about this commercial, and it seems that the twelve hundred school children singing in unison on the hilltop are simply reenacting Warhol’s silkscreens on a larger scale. The differences in the costumes and appearances of the singers, which some might suppose signify diversity, are little more than the different shadings of Coke bottles in Warhol’s work or the different flavors and styles of Coca-Cola available for purchase at the supermarket—diet Coke, Cherry Coke, Vanilla Coke—all essentially the same syrup and carbonated water. Both exemplify what the influential art critic Craig Owens identifies as a “serial mode of production,” in which a “limited gamut of differences” is introduced into mass-produced commodities, giving consumers the “illusion of choice” (119).<br><br>	Repetition with superficial difference is one of the hallmarks of late capitalism and with the singular image of “Four molotovs in the Coke sixpack”  DeLillo explodes the hegemony of Coca-Cola as imagined in its advertising campaigns, past, present, and future. Coke’s taglines—“The pause that refreshes” (1929); “Things go better with Coke” (1963); “It’s the real thing” (1969); “Coke adds life” (1978); “Coke is it” (1982); “You can’t beat the real thing” (1990); and most recently, “Always Coca-Cola”—acquire a dark undertone when suddenly linked to Coke bottles filled with gasoline, their bottlenecks stuffed with oil-soaked rags. Coca-Cola still represents youth, vigor, and authenticity, but now the hidden underside of these values is revealed: unrest, disobedience, destruction, and everything else associated with those firebombs named after one of Stalin’s chief deputies. Coke’s trademarked themes might as well be replaced with “Things go better with handmade explosives” or “Coke adds death.” <br><br>	Again, “four molotovs in the Coke sixpack”: not only have four Coke bottles been transformed into homemade bombs, but it is conceivable that two bottles of untainted regular Coke—what might be called Classic Coke—could easily be slipped into the sixpack’s two empty slots to replace the molotovs already dispensed. This image of molotovs in a Coke sixpack is the best example of a “disruptive cultural juxtaposition” in “The Uniforms,” and now I wish to elaborate upon Walter Benjamin’s concept of the dialectical image, which relies upon what Susan Buck-Morss calls “a way of seeing that crystallizes antithetical elements” (210). In other words, in a dialectical image opposing elements come together in a way that disrupts a typical reading of either of the elements. In his massive project on the nineteenth-century Parisian Arcades—the forerunners of today’s malls—Benjamin says that in dialectical images “we begin to recognize the monuments of the bourgeoisie as ruins even before they have crumbled” (Arcades 13). Coca-Cola may not be a monument in the traditional sense of the word, but nobody can doubt that Coke’s impact on American—and global—culture has been monumental. By 1969 Coca-Cola was being sold in 135 countries, and gross sales had reached $1.3 billion, which translated into a profit of $121 million. Furthermore, the Atlanta-based company was spending $100 million a year in advertising, making Coke-cum-icon available to most of the world’s population, even if they could not actually buy the drink. (Pendergrast 296). <br><br>	By transforming a Coke bottle into a dialectical image, DeLillo alienates the commodity from its accepted context, breaking the spell of the ordinary which surrounds it. Once a Molotov cocktail is brewed inside a Coca-Cola bottle, it is difficult to look at either again in the same way. The bottle—and wherever and whatever it explodes—truly does become a ruin. In the same way that Rauschenberg problematizes the Coca-Cola bottle with his unsettling combines, DeLillo demonstrates the problem with Warhol’s disingenuous observation that serves as my epigraph:<br><br>What’s great about this country is that America started the tradition where the richest consumers buy essentially the same things as the poorest. You can be watching TV and see Coca-Cola, and you can know that the President drinks Coke, Liz Taylor drinks Coke, and just think, you can drink Coke, too. A Coke is a Coke and no amount of money can get you a better Coke than the one the bum on the corner is drinking. All the Cokes are the same and all the Cokes are good. Liz Taylor knows it, the President knows it, the bum knows, and you know it. (Warhol 100-101)<br><br>Despite Warhol’s statement to the contrary, DeLillo demonstrates that not “all the Cokes are good”—especially not the ones with gasoline in them. In fact, DeLillo raises the possibility that all Cokes are Molotovs-in-waiting, whose potential energy, if not kinetic force, far overpowers the relatively weak fizzle in each bottle. The terrorists’ homemade weapon reveals the violence immanent in consumer culture, the violence that was there all along, flowing into and out of every bottle of Coke. DeLillo’s harsh critique of consumer culture in “The Uniforms” is doled out in equal measure to every responsible party: the Coca-Cola Company, which is now explicitly linked to death and destruction; the people drinking Coke, who contribute to its global dominance; and finally, the unreflecting terrorists who transform consumer products into bombs. <br><br>	I have highlighted the roles of two ordinary consumer items in “The Uniforms”—bananas and Coca-Cola—and it should not be surprising that in this world of global connections there is a direct link between them. In fact, the relationship between bananas and Coca-Cola, both seemingly ancillary to DeLillo’s story, comes into sudden relief when one discovers the geographical and historical connection between the two. In Guatemala, where revolutionaries really do stalk the countryside and have done so for decades, the Coca-Cola bottling plants throughout much of the twentieth century were wholly owned and operated by the United Fruit Company—the same company that has dominated the economies of Latin America since the twenties, the same company that played a major role in the 1954 coup, the same company now operating as Chiquita Brands International. As Pendergrast notes, the internal trade publication Coca-Cola Overseas even praised United Fruit in 1957 “for supplying workers on its banana plantations with Coca-Cola, their favorite soft drink”—strangely neglecting to mention the sudden change in government three years earlier (Pendergrast 249). The Coca-Cola Overseas article even boasts that <br><br>one of the main features of the headquarters town or plantation way station is the Company owned commissary where, aside from the bare necessities of life, the finer things for better living can be purchased. One always finds plenty of ice-cold ‘Coca-Cola’ available to anyone, anywhere in the United Fruit Company’s operating territory. (Stephens 21)<br><br>The “bare necessities of life”—this is, the article baldly states, all that the laborers of United Fruit should expect. That is, if one does not see Coke as one of “the finer things for better living” but as a sickly sweet anodyne, numbing the workers with all its icy cold goodness.<br><br>	To conclude my reading of “The Uniforms” I want to fast-forward to Players, Don DeLillo’s 1977 novel about a Wall Street broker’s increasing involvement with a terrorist organization planning to blow up the New York Stock Exchange. In many ways Players is an evolution of the themes DeLillo tackled in “The Uniforms.” In fact, the scene in “The Uniforms” in which the terrorists murder several golfers reappears in the prologue to Players, an intertextual reference that I explore in the next chapter. For now I want to recall an episode in which the broker, Lyle Wynant, meets Marina, his contact from the terrorist group. As they rendezvous in an alley on the Lower East Side they witness a common urban scene:<br><br>It was nearly dark. Five bottles, thrown from a roof, hit the pavement at ten-second intervals. Marina’s eyes revealed the faintest clue of amusement.<br>“A little gasoline, you have a political act.”<br>“As it is, what?”<br>“Public nuisance,” she said. (Players 144)<br><br>Marina recognizes the bottles exist on a continuum of signification: first, a bottle by itself, its potential untapped; second, a bottle thrown from a rooftop, a public nuisance; and third, a bottle full of gasoline thrown from the rooftop, a “political act.” Yet that political statement is not what we think it is. Intrigued by the bottles hitting the pavement, Lyle asks the most obvious question and receives an unexpected answer:<br><br>“Who’s the target, I wonder.”<br>“The bottle is the target. They’re breaking the bottle.” (144)<br><br>Whatever rage, hatred, or indifference led to the bottle toss, it is ultimately directed toward the bottle itself. The whole act becomes a closed system, the weapon its own target, the target its own weapon, a circular logic I suggest transposing onto “The Uniforms.” The target of every Molotov used in “The Uniforms,” whether it is the one Jean-Claude girlishly tosses into a guard post or the one he places on the drive sprocket of a tank, is the bottle itself. There is no political statement other than the showering of flaming, broken glass. Destruction, a void, nothingness—this is the world of terrorism. <br><br>	When Mao II, inspired in part by the Fatwa against Salman Rushdie, was published in 1991, DeLillo told an interviewer that “in a society that’s filled with glut and repetition and endless consumption, the act of terror may be the only meaningful act” (Passaro 77). I understand DeLillo’s sentiment here: terrorism as a way of breaking out of the seemingly impenetrable prison of consumer culture, obliterating the repetition rather than simply parodying it, as Warhol does; unlike the mass-produced commodities glamorized in advertising and Hollywood cinema, the terrorist act is original and singular, a product of vision rather than submission. In describing the terrorist act as a “meaningful” response to the world of “endless consumption,” however, DeLillo uncharacteristically simplifies the nature of cultural resistance. “The Uniforms” and Players offers a more critical reading of terrorism, in effect likening it to the very world of “glut and repetition” that terrorism seeks to refute. The revolutionaries in “The Uniforms” terrorize in the same way that they consume: mindlessly, ahistorically, endlessly. In “The Uniforms” and the bottle-throwing scene in Players, DeLillo shows that a Molotov cocktail is not a reaction to consumer culture, but is actually a constituent part. Perhaps DeLillo was being overly optimistic in his interview about Mao II,  for as he suggested years earlier in “The Uniforms,” even the terrorist act may be meaningless as well, as empty a political act as drinking a can of Coke.<br><br>	<br><br>	CHAPTER 2:<br>Consumer Grief in Players<br><br><br><br>Civilization did not rise and flourish as men hammered out hunting scenes on bronze gates and whispered philosophy under the stars, with garbage as a noisome offshoot, swept away and forgotten. No, garbage rose first, inciting people to build a civilization in response, in self-defense.<br><br>	- Don DeLillo, Underworld (287)<br><br><br><br>What draws the reader to the novel is the hope of warming his shivering life with a death he reads about<br><br>	- Walter Benjamin, Illuminations (101)<br><br><br><br>In my reading of “The Uniforms” we saw how DeLillo questions the relationship between the everyday objects of consumer culture and the latent violence that seems to emanate from these objects. In particular, DeLillo highlights the packaging of these objects and how appealing, seductive surfaces veil a complicated network of social relations, deflecting questions about production, exploitation, or origin. The terrorists in “The Uniforms” repeatedly mistake these surfaces for substance. After all, it is not the banana so much as what is on the outside of the banana—the sticker on the peel—that is the target of DeLillo’s terrorists. Likewise, it is not the Coca Cola inside the bottle, but the Coke bottle itself that the terrorists use to mix Molotov cocktails. The problem of the package reappears elsewhere in DeLillo’s fiction. In White Noise Jack Gladney observes that consumer packaging—in this case, cereal boxes—are “the only avant-garde we’ve got” (White Noise 10). Murray Jay Siskind, a former sportswriter and self-proclaimed Elvis scholar, later agrees with Jack. Admiring the stark black and white-packaged generic products lining the shelves of an eighties supermarket, Murray tells Jack, “You were right, Jack. This is the last avant-garde. Bold new forms. The power to shock” (19).  Jack and Murray fetishize packaging, an attitude DeLillo ultimately disparages, for accepting the shock value of packages means ignoring what lies behind the “bold new forms.” The “power to shock” is a shield, precluding any analysis that goes beyond the kinds of superficial observations Jack and Murray make. While White Noise addresses directly the power of consumer packaging—and the failure to critically consider that packaging—I focus here on DeLillo’s scrutinization of “the last avant-garde” in his 1977 novel, Players, in particular paying attention to the ways DeLillo shows how everyday life is governed and limited by the concept of the package.<br><br>	Praised in the New York Times at the time for its “wit, elegance, and economy,” as well as for its “bitter clarity” (Johnson 153), Players is the story of Lyle Wynant, a Wall Street broker who witnesses an assassination on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange and slowly—but with a sense of inevitability—becomes involved with the terrorist group responsible for the killing. Lyle’s story, steeped in the cryptic language of conspiracy and the seductive allure of revolutionary violence, is the story that has attracted critical attention. After all, a novel about terrorism in New York City is a difficult novel for a literary scholar to resist, even before the fateful events of September 11, 2001. But Players is also a story about this man’s wife, Pammy, who works for a firm called Grief Management Council, a counseling service that helps communities “understand and assimilate grief” (18). While the expansive, boundless violence of terrorism propels the plot of Players, I argue in this chapter that a more sophisticated understanding of the novel awaits those who dwell on the concentrated violence of reduction and diminishment that Pammy encounters when her lover burns himself alive in a garbage dump. It is this abnegating violence of self-immolation, not the glamorous violence of terrorism, that DeLillo uses most forcefully to critique what he calls “the backdrop of brightly colored packages and products” that promise fulfillment and happiness in America (DeCurtis 295-96). <br><br>PACKAGES OF LACQUER<br><br>Before I discuss the violence of the burning body and link it to DeLillo’s critique of American consumer life, it is necessary to consider “the glamour of revolutionary violence” in Players to which Lyle—and many literary critics—fall prey (8). I begin, then, with the puzzling prologue of the novel. As DeLillo has pointed out, the major characters of Players all appear in abstracted form in the prologue. “They don’t have names,” DeLillo told interviewer Tom LeClair. “Their connections to each other are not clear in all cases. They’re on an airplane, watching a movie, but all the other seats are empty. They’re isolated, above the story, waiting to be named” (Tom LeClair, Interview 82). The prologue is entitled “The Movie,” and indeed, the focus of the prologue is an in-flight movie that the unnamed passengers watch, in which terrorists massacre a group of middle-aged men on a country club course. If this scenario sounds familiar, it is because it is a virtual replay of a similar scene in “The Uniforms.” In the earlier story, Bradley and the rest brutally assault four men and two women on a golf course who all “looked ridiculous in the bright orange, yellow and green outfits they wore” (“The Uniforms” 456). Making the “Algerian sound,” learned from repeated viewings of Pontecorvo’s Battle of Algiers, a sound like “electrical crickets that would roll down from the heights of the Arab quarter to the French colonialists in their four-poster beds” (457), the terrorists in “The Uniforms” sweep down onto the seventh fairway and kill the golfers. <br><br>	In Players, the attack occurs very much the same way. Like the victims in “The Uniforms,” the portly golfers in the movie “wear the kind of rampantly bright sports clothes that suburban men favor on weekends, colors so strident they might serve as illustrations of the folly of second childhood” (5). Unlike “The Uniforms,” however, even before the terrorists come onto the scene there is a sense of violence lurking in the game, hidden barely beneath the surface. DeLillo describes a scene in which men with clubs of iron and wood in their hands tromp across a chemically green countryside, occasionally planting flags in the ground, as if to claim a territory. One of the golfers takes a practice swing, lofting an imaginary ball into the sky, and his tee partner performs a movement that reveals the habit of violence in American leisure life, “tucking the club head into his armpits and sighting along the shaft, briefly, in a rifle-firing jest” (6). The golfer only pretends his club is a rifle. He is playing. But what exactly is play in this context? The anthropologist Gregory Bateson argues that any game, any activity framed by an explicit or implicit acknowledgement that “this is play” constantly threatens to break out of its frame. According to Bateson, the message “This is play” can be understood to mean something like this: <br><br>These actions in which we now engage do not denote what those actions for which they stand would denote. (180)<br><br>Using the example of two monkeys play-fighting each other, Bateson explains that “the playful nip denotes the bite, but it does not denote what would be denoted by the bite” (180). The paradox—the threat—is that at any given moment the nip can turn into a bite, and the metacommunicative message which signals play is scrambled. In other words, the statement This is play is always veering towards its inverse, the uneasy question Is this play? The “rifle-firing jest” marks the Batesonian paradox of the game of golf in Players and in fact, gestures toward the paradox of play that undergirds the entire novel. That is, what appears to be play—Lyle later cavorting with terrorists, Pammy later sleeping with Jack—is often seriously and absurdly not play. This is a theme to which I will return in a moment, but for now what is most critical to bear in mind is that from the beginning, Players questions the nature of play.	<br><br>Moments after the playful “rife-firing,” a man rises from the underbrush in the foreground of the movie frame. He signals to someone and “it’s evident he holds a weapon in his right hand, a semiautomatic rifle” (7). With the appearance of this armed man the make-believe violence—the play—shifts to real violence. Suddenly a bizarrely-dressed crew of terrorists straight out of “The Uniforms”—wearing paisley vests, buckskin pants, baseball hats—descends upon the golfers, waving machetes and firing semiautomatic weapons. DeLillo highlights the camera techniques that would normally accompany such a scene in film, the special effects that aestheticize the violence. “Most of what happens next takes place in slow motion…. a lyrical interlude.” (8) “Bodies tumble in slow motion” and “bodies are blown back into sand and high grass” (8 and 9). The film climaxes when the leader of the terrorists strides onto the fairway, where “golfers are strewn everywhere. . . . little packages of lacquer” and fires a victory round into the air (10). The only cinematic element missing is sound. “Without headsets, of course,” DeLillo reminds the reader, “the people in the piano bar aren’t able to hear the sound track of the movie being shown” (4). There are no Hollywood sound effects, no explosions in Dolby stereo. This silence leaves the pianist—who later takes shape in the novel as A.J. Kinnear, one of the terrorists—free to improvise a film score to accompany the film. As if the movie were a Buster Keaton short or an early Chaplin film, the piano player in the lounge fingers “a typical score for a silent film” (4).  Juxtaposed against the unsettling scenes of violence on the screen, the piano’s “shiny tinkle” lends the film an “irony too apt to be ignored” (8). The irony is not lost upon the airline passengers: “Watching golfers being massacred, to trills and other ornaments, seems to strike those in the piano bar, at any rate, as an occasion for sardonic delight” (9).  <br><br>	DeLillo places a heavy burden on the word “sardonic.” What does he mean by it? What is its resonance for him? Shortly after the publication of Libra in 1988, DeLillo used the word again when he told an interviewer for Rolling Stone that violence in American society is “a kind of sardonic response to the promise of consumer fulfillment” (DeCurtis 295). DeLillo theorizes that the American response to the utopian and impossible promises of capitalism is violence. Not an angry violence, or a hateful violence, or even a desperate violence. It is sardonic—scornful, bitter, mocking. DeLillo is almost certainly aware of the etymological roots of “sardonic” and they bear repeating here. The word is derived from the Latin sardonian, an adjective which describes the effects of eating the poisonous leaves of a plant native to the island of Sardinia. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the plant was said “to produce facial convulsions resembling horrible laughter, usually followed by death” (OED “Sardonian”). Horrible laughter, usually followed by death: this is how we respond to a life of consumer fulfillment. <br><br>The spectacle DeLillo’s airline passengers enjoy on their movie screen evokes a sardonic response as well. In one of the few explicit moral judgments in the novel, DeLillo warns the reader that we are “steeped in gruesomely humorous ambiguity, a spectacle of ridiculous people doing awful things to total fools” (9). Of whom does DeLillo speak? The terrorists on the screen or the passengers on the plane, laughing along to the mischievous piano playing? In the end it is both. DeLillo peoples his novel with fools, who, for all their urbane conversation and cultural cynicism, fail to see the correlation between the violence on screen and the violence in their own lives. The final scene of the in-flight film is a survey of the killing field, jarring images accompanied even now by the piano. “The golfers are strewn everywhere. We see them frame by frame, split open, little packages of lacquer” (10). Note how the bloody dead bodies are described as packages coated with lacquer. The suburban golfers are reduced to objects, their contents spilling out of them. They are packages, leaky ones at that. Human beings, it turns out, are “brightly colored packages” too, as corporate and commodified as cereal boxes. This seems to be some sort of truth the passengers disavow, and it is telling that their response is the same response DeLillo imagines Americans have towards the spectacle of consumer culture. We are dangerously close to a closed feedback loop, in which violence is a sardonic response to the promises made by consumer culture, and sardonic delight is the response to this violence. If this is a feedback loop, is there an escape? DeLillo’s novel follows two escapes, two possible responses to the ironies of American violence: death and grief.<br><br>GRIEF MANAGEMENT <br><br>DeLillo presents two versions of grief in Players: there is the discourse of grief, which simply rehearses the language of grief, and there is the process of grieving, shorn of any rhetoric, an experience outside language. Pammy’s employer—Grief Management Council—embodies the former. “Grief was not the founder’s name,” writes DeLillo in some of the sharpest satire of the novel, “it referred to intense mental suffering, deep remorse, extreme anguish, acute sorrow and the like” (18). Grief Management describes itself as a “growing personal-services organization” that offers brochures and counselors to help communities “understand and assimilate grief” (18). The company’s name belies its true nature, however. The homonym “Council” overwrites the concept of counseling—of listening and sharing advice—with the idea of a legislative body, a tribunal passing judgment. The word signals a shift away from dialogue towards decree. Likewise, grief may not be the founder’s name, but neither is it an emotion to be felt. Grief is an asset to be managed, no different than a stock portfolio. Grief Management literally represents an investment in grief: there are “fees for individuals, group fees, special consultation terms, charges for booklets and teaching aids, payments for family sessions and marital grief seminars” (18). The discourse of grief, it appears, returns a profit.<br><br>	Pammy spends her days at Grief Management writing brochures like “It Ends For Him On The Day He Dies—But You Have To Face Tomorrow.” Beyond the canned platitude in the title, the brochure does not offer any therapeutic guidance. It is, in fact, a sales brochure that prospective customers can send away for. The brochure “elaborated on death, defined the study known as grief management and offered a detailed summary of the company’s programs (‘Let Professionals Help You Cope’) and a listing of regional offices. It cost a dollar” (62-63). Grief Management’s services cost money, and even the brochure that outlines those services costs money. Pammy is both cynical and proud about her job with Grief Management. “In a context in which every phrase can take on horribly comic significance, she thought she’d done well,” yet Pammy also acknowledges that “her job, in the main, was a joke, as was the environment in which she carried it out” (63). Pammy observes that among the absurdities of her job, <br><br>office space at Grief Management was constantly being reapportioned. Workmen sealed off some areas with partitions, opened up others, moved out file cabinets, wheeled in chairs and desks. It was as though they’d been directed to adjust the amount of furniture to levels of national grief. (19)<br><br>Pammy imagines that Grief Management is somehow attuned to national grief in a way that is measured by cubicle size or furniture mass—truly impersonal indicators that have nothing to do with real grieving. If Grief Management is aware of “levels of national grief,” the company has a bizarre way of showing it, which illustrates exactly how disconnected Grief Management is from the human element of grief. The company deals only in abstractions. This is what Pammy means when she considers her job a “joke.” How can one take such a job in such an office seriously?<br><br>DeLillo ironically places the company’s offices on the eighty-third floor of the north tower of the World Trade Center, which had been completed in 1973. The presence of the Twin Towers in Players is eerie to say the least. Even before September 11, 2001, DeLillo’s placement of Grief Management Council in a skyscraper symbolizing global capitalism was a canny choice. (After September 11, the choice became uncanny.) In a history of the towers Angus Gillespie reminds readers that for most of their life the Twin Towers “had fierce critics who regarded them as an ugly blight on the landscape” (126). Plagued with low occupancy rates, electricity and sewage disposal problems, not to mention chronic laments about ungainly and graceless architectural lines, the World Trade Center seemed to symbolize the arrogance and folly of global capitalism in the seventies. After seeing chief architect Minoru Yamasaki’s model for the buildings, the influential Washington Post architectural critic Wolf von Eckardt declared that the World Trade Center was a “fearful instrument of urbicide.” Its two towers, he wrote, “just stand there, artless and dumb, without any relationship to anything, not even to each other” (Von Eckardt 94). The fact the World Trade Center would be, as Gillespie relates the joke, “the world’s tallest building for the world’s shortest time” (113)—the taller Sears Tower in Chicago was completed in 1974—only further mocks the hubris of its designers, and indeed, the very idea of building the center for world trade.<br><br>	Reflecting upon the Twin Towers’ enduring presence in advertising and film (like Dino De Laurentiis’s regrettable 1976 remake of King Kong), Gillespie concludes that the buildings eventually won acceptance from the public simply because of their sheer magnitude (136). A more nuanced explanation for the eventual popular success of the Twin Towers comes from the social historian David Nye, who proposes the phrase “geometrical sublime”—a reconfiguration of Kant’s mathematical sublime—to describe the awe-inspiring effect of skyscrapers. Like the Empire State Building and other early skyscrapers of New York City, the Twin Towers enabled a “magisterial gaze” of the city. One might view them from a distance as part of a “jagged skyline,” or look out from the Observation Deck on the 107th floor to the “immense vistas” in the distance, or simply spy down on the “insect life of the street below” (Nye 107-108). In each case, Nye argues, the magisterial gaze affords a sublime experience. <br><br>	DeLillo problematizes this “magisterial gaze” by turning Pammy’s lunch hour into slapstick. Returning from lunch, she confuses the towers, mistakenly entering the south tower rather than the north, where she works. Now, in the middle of the presumed center of world trade, she struggles to find her way to the global headquarters of a company founded on grief and suffering. In a scene that borrows from the spirit of Chaplin’s Modern Times, Pammy has to “to fight the lunch-hour mob in the sky lobby here, go back down to the main floor, walk over to the north tower, take the express up to that seventy-eighth-floor sky lobby, fight more crowds, then take a local to eighty-three, panels vibrating” (14). Another passenger in the sky lobby dryly comments, “But don’t you just love this place? You should see how I have to get to the cafeteria. A local and an express down. Then an express up. Then the escalator if you can get there without them ripping your flesh to pieces” (15). The workers succumb to a sense of entrapment, as if they were caught in the belly of a beast that will tear “your flesh to pieces.” Pammy later thinks about the elevators as “places” as opposed to spaces. She “asked herself, not without morbid scorn: ‘When does this place get to the forty-fourth floor?’ Or: ‘Isn’t it just a matter of time before this place gets stuck with me inside it?’” (23). These passages seems prophetic today, but in 1977, I believe they were meant to be merely, in a word, sardonic. DeLillo recognizes that the scale of the Twin Towers is not simply gigantic, it is what Von Eckardt calls “utterly inhuman” (95), and the simple necessity of eating becomes an epic journey in the World Trade Center. The building, like the Grief Management Council it houses, is wholly indifferent to human needs.<br><br>	Even from a distance, DeLillo treats the “magisterial gaze” ironically. One evening Lyle and Pammy have their friends Ethan Segal and Jack Laws over for dinner. Ethan is one of Pammy’s coworkers, and Jack is his lover. Enjoying dinner and drinks on the rooftop of the Wynant’s apartment, Jack says, “I didn’t know this was up here,” referring to the picnic tables on the rooftop. Lyle deadpans, “It’s to give Pammy a look at the World Trade Center whenever she’s depressed. That gets her going again” (81). Of course, Lyle is not serious; a glance at the World Trade Center does not get Pammy “going again.” Moments later one of the four remarks offhandedly, “That plane looks like it’s going to hit” (84). DeLillo provides no description of what the speaker is seeing; we have only this drunken comment, which is ignored by the other three. The rambling conversation continues unabated, a perfect example of Mark Osteen’s characterization of conversation in Players: “their dialogue is the brittle, superficially witty conversation of a movie script” (144). For all the reader knows, there may not even be an airplane soaring across the New York City skyline. In today’s world the comment may be an unsettling reminder of September 11, 2001, but in 1977, the remark serves as a thematic marker—underscoring the fact that a “magisterial gaze” does not envelope the World Trade Center in Players. <br><br>	The towers, with all their “tyrannic grandeur,” as Pammy describes them, summon the specter of violence (24). From her office on the eighty-third floor, Pammy looks out “across the landfill, the piers, the western extremities of anonymous streets.” It is not a sublime experience. Rather, it is charged with a dreadful recognition: “Even at this height she could detect the sweltering intensity, a slow roiling force. It moved up into the air, souls of the living” (24). The Towers have a magnetic pull, and the “souls of the living” rise up to meet them. Pammy had originally thought that “the World Trade Center was an unlikely place for an outfit” like Grief Management. Pammy changes her mind, however. “Where else,” she wonders, “would you stack all this grief?” (18). In the final analysis, Pammy sees through the Twin Towers’ façade and imagines the World Trade Center as a kind of package, not as a “huge steel-and-concrete package” for world trade as Von Eckardt sees them, but as a file cabinet for all the grief in the world (Von Eckardt 94).<br><br>THE SECRET MEANING OF NEW PLACES<br><br>Grief Management employs the rhetoric of grief as a means for people to “codify their emotions.” The company is nothing more than an overwrought “clerical structure” and it contrasts starkly with a moment in the novel of pure, real grief that no package can contain (19). This moment occurs away from New York City, on Deer Isle, an island off the coast of Maine where Pammy, Ethan, and Jack spend a week vacationing. The threesome seek in idyllic Maine a sustenance they cannot find in the city, the “secret meaning of new places” (137). Even the sound of the word “Maine” they find comforting. The word has “a kind of hewn strength,” Ethan says. “Sort of unbreakable, unlike Connecticut. I like hearing it” (21). It is in Maine, literally at the edge of the earth, that Jack tells Pammy that he is not gay, that he is thinking of leaving Ethan and drifting out on his own. “Just place to place,” Jack tells Pammy late one night on the deck, after Ethan has gone inside. “An unsupervised existence. It’s what I should have done a long time ago” (142). Later Pammy and Jack have sex on a private beach while Ethan is in town shopping. This initiates a period of “shifting allegiances” between Pammy, Ethan, and Jack, what Pammy sees as the “secret life of their involvement” (177). Osteen reads this episode as emblematic of the “economy of secrecy” that pervades Players, in which humans seek secrets as “substitutes for real involvement” (152). In other words, DeLillo’s characters believe that secrets allow passive, vicarious participation, but without all of the complications and complicities of true, active participation.<br><br>	The final scene in Maine illustrates that this craving for secrets is fatally flawed, but it also, more to the point of my argument, marks the culmination of DeLillo’s fascination with grief and packages in Players. Several days after the brief affair on the beach, Pammy, Ethan, and Jack’s car breaks down on a busy road. Ethan decides that Jack “would go looking for a service station, a repairman, a telephone, whichever turned out to be more accessible” (178). Waiting for him to return, Pammy observes a miniature golf course across the highway, “catching glimpses of three boys walking over a small rise, shouldering their clubs” (178). The sudden presence of golf recalls the prologue of Players. Everything now appears on a reduced scale—miniature golf, boys instead of men—but the hints of violence are still there: the boys “shouldering their clubs” look like hunters-in-training. It is not a good omen. Instead of finding help, Jack follows through on his vow to really be “going this time. I should have done it years ago. This is no life” (177). But Jack leaves in a manner that threatens to evade meaning, it is so unexpected and arbitrary. Jack burns himself alive in a garbage dump. His body, which Pammy and Ethan find sitting-cross legged in the dump, is “shriveled and discolored, burned right through, down to muscles, down to tendons, down to nerves, blood vessels, bones” (198). Everything that makes a person an individual—a personality, a face, a body—had been burnt away, leaving in their place smoldering remains, a human being reduced to one essential element—carbon. <br><br>	This scene resists assimilation. For both Pammy and the reader it represents an act of profound violence against the self that cannot be absorbed into the narrative of daily life. Pammy finds the self-discipline it requires unfathomable. <br><br>His arms were in front of him, hands crossed at about the same place his ankles were crossed. This had seemed ceremonial, the result of research on his part. […] She recalled wondering whether he’d had to exercise will power to keep his body in that position during the time it took for the fire to negate all semblance of conscious choice. (198)<br><br>What might Jack’s “research” have been? What history had Jack tapped into? What “ceremonial” rituals form the backdrop of this scene? Jack is not the only burning man in DeLillo’s world, and it is revealing to recall other acts of self-immolation in DeLillo’s fiction. In fact, DeLillo recently opened a reading of his 2003 novel Cosmopolis by describing an incident that occurred amid the brutal Soviet clampdown following the Prague Spring in 1968. The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia <br><br>ended a brief, exhilarating period of de-Stalinization. A short time afterward, a student set himself on fire outside the National Museum of Prague. <br><br>And this event, DeLillo tells his audience, spawned a sequel:<br><br>Thirty-five years later, or about a month ago, another student set himself on fire in the same place. And of course, he wasn’t protesting communist restrictions on freedom. It seemed he was protesting power and money, the excesses of capitalism. There is a lot of excess in Cosmopolis. There is also a violent protest—an anti-globalist protest in Times Square in New York. And there is a burning man, finally. (DeLillo, Reading)<br><br>DeLillo refers here to two individuals: Jan Palach, who set himself on fire in front of the National Museum in 1969 to protest the Soviet invasion that crushed the Prague Spring; and Zdenek Adamec, an eighteen-year-old Czech student who burned himself alive in March 2003. Although his death echoes Palach’s protest against Soviet-style totalitarianism, Adamec protests against the ideology that won the Cold War. In his suicide note Adamec wrote, “I am another victim of the democratic system, where it is not people who decide, but power and money. […] Drugs, violence, money and power—these are the passwords of our civilization” (Green A3). <br><br>	DeLillo had finished Cosmopolis by the time of Adamec’s death, but his novel mines the same anti-capitalist sentiment Adamec expresses in his suicide note. The anti-hero of Cosmopolis is Eric Packer, an insanely wealthy asset manager and currency trader. At one point in a drive across Manhattan, Packer witnesses an anti-globalization protest reminiscent of protests against the World Trade Organization in the late nineties. Packer finds the protesters to be naïve, even complicit with the capitalist system: <br><br>There was a shadow of transaction between the demonstrators and the state. The protest was a form of systemic hygiene, purging and lubricating. It attested again, for the ten thousandth time, to the market culture’s innovative brilliance, its ability to shape itself to its own flexible ends, absorbing everything around it. (Cosmopolis 99)<br><br>Packer proposes a familiar analysis of capitalism—that it absorbs even those things that seem to threaten it. In this formulation of consumer culture, unforgiving critiques are recast as irony, violence and sex transformed into consumer images, and protests diffused into the carnivalesque. Packer watches from his stretch limousine as protesters variously parade by costumed as giant rats, bomb a major investment bank, and rewire an electronic display in Times Square to read bastardized quotations from Marx—“A SPECTER IS HAUNTING THE WORLD—THE SPECTER OF CAPITALISM” (96). Packer reads the carnivalesque atmosphere of the protest as a steam valve, giving vent to frustrations easily reined in. Packer would seem to agree with Stallybrass’s and White’s critical reformulation of Bakhtin’s carnivalesque. Whereas Bakhtin celebrated the carnivalesque as inherently subversive to the status quo, Stallybrass and White argue that it is a means through which the middle class reasserts its own position in society, by fragmenting, marginalizing, sublimating, and repressing subversive forces which represent a threat to the status quo (Stallybrass and White 178). <br><br>	Packer’s encounter with a burning man, however, complicates his understanding of the carnivalesque. Packer flatly describes the event from the safety of his limousine: <br><br>There was a man on fire. People turned away crouching or stood with hands to faces, spun and crouched and went to their knees, or walked past unaware, ran past in the shuffle and smoke without noticing, or watched spell-struck, bodies going slack, faces round and dumb. (97)<br><br>Detached from the protesters, Packer meditates about the meaning of the burning man to the mob of protesters. “They wanted him to be young and driven by conviction.” This would lend depth, honesty, force to his dramatic suicide, turning it into a statement. Vija Kinski, one of Packer’s many assistants, disagrees. Kinski is Packer’s “chief of theory,” and she reminds Eric, “It’s not original” (100). Well-schooled in the discourse of Marxism and poststructuralism, Kinski sees the burning man as an appropriation of “all those Vietnamese monks, one after another, in all their lotus positions” from the early sixties (100). The most famous of these monks was the first, the Buddhist Quang Duc, who set himself aflame in Saigon on June 11, 1963. Duc’s burning body was captured on camera by Malcolm Browne, a photojournalist for the Associated Press. Browne vividly remembers that the suicide was “clearly theater staged by the Buddhists to achieve a certain political end. At the same time, there was a human element to it that was horrifying” (Browne par. 4). Ignoring Kinski’s analysis, Packer concludes that the burning man he witnesses is one protest event that is inassimilable. The market “could not claim this man or assimilate his act. Not such starkness and horror. This was a thing outside its reach” (100). Death, Packer imagines, is one element the market economy cannot absorb. Death elevates the fundamentally playful nature of the carnivalesque beyond the realm of play, breaking out once and for all from the Batesonian paradox of play. Suicide is the ultimate protest because it is the ultimate last word. The burning man spawns a yawning silence which cannot be addressed. <br><br>	How is Jack’s suicide different from the self-immolation of Buddhist monks, Czech students, or protesters of global capitalism? Compared to these politically motivated suicides, Jack’s actions seem unpremeditated, devoid of any meaning. This burning body differs from the other burning bodies in DeLillo’s imagination in that there is no obvious political context, no apparent ideological statement made by the burning man. He burns, as it were, in a vacuum, a blank space. There is no narrative thread we follow to the suicide, no details about how Jack did it or what he was thinking. We simply find out as Pammy and Ethan find out, and it is a shock. Nobody sees it coming. Osteen offers a psychological explanation, suggesting that Jack’s actions are an act of “emotional terrorism,” exposing to Pammy her “disavowal of responsibility” towards Ethan and Jack (151). This domestic drama is indeed present in the novel, but I think a close consideration of the means and circumstances of Jack’s death reveals a deeper purpose to his death. The key lies in the surroundings of Jack’s burnt body: he is found in a garbage dump, among the discarded trash of consumer America. <br><br>	Garbage, trash, refuse—like burning bodies, these have been a recurring thematic concerns of DeLillo’s. In White Noise, for example, Jack Gladney rummages through his family’s garbage, looking for evidence of his wife’s pill addiction. Jack does not find the pills, but he does discover <br><br>a horrible clotted mass of hair, soap, ear swabs, crushed roaches, flip-top rings, sterile pads smeared with pus and bacon fat, strands of frayed dental floss, fragments of ballpoint refills, toothpicks still displaying bits of impaled food. (259) <br><br>Garbage in this instance represents what Julia Kristeva calls the abject—that which one must cast aside in order to survive, the “foul lining of society” (20). More often than not the abject is vaguely organic, hovering between life and death, repulsive yet compelling evidence of biological processes—like a “clotted mass of hair.” Garbage is a precursor to life, not that which is thrust aside so much as that which is necessary for life itself to emerge, a profound mystery. What “clues,” Jack wonders, “to secret yearnings, humiliating flaws” lie in the garbage? What “habits, fetishes, addictions, inclinations? What solitary acts, behavioral ruts?” (259). <br><br>	A substantial portion of DeLillo’s 1996 novel Underworld is likewise devoted to the subject of trash. One of its narrators, Nick Shay, works for Waste Containment, a glorified trash company that deals with military and industrial waste. So central is garbage to Nick that his relationship to refuse supersedes other relationships. In the supermarket Nick and his wife “saw products as garbage even when they sat gleaming on store shelves, yet unbought. We didn’t say, What kind of casserole will that make? We said, What kind of garbage will that make?” (Underworld 121). A running gag in Underworld is a garbage barge that cannot find a place to dock, like the infamous Mobro, which left Long Island in 1987, traveling 6,000 miles along the Atlantic seaboard and the Gulf Coast, looking for a place to dump 3,100 tons of trash (Gutis B1). At Waste Containment Nick meets Detwiler, a self-professed “garbage guerrilla” who rummages through the household trash of the rich and famous, including J. Edgar Hoover. Detwiler explains to Nick the centrality of trash to American life: <br><br>Civilization did not rise and flourish as men hammered out hunting scenes on bronze gates and whispered philosophy under the stars, with garbage as a noisome offshoot, swept away and forgotten. No, garbage rose first, inciting people to build a civilization in response, in self-defense. (Underworld 287)<br><br>Through Nick and Detwiler, DeLillo turns the accepted notion of trash on its head. In seeing garbage first, civilization second, DeLillo imagines the marketplace as a resplendent ruin, sensing wreckage where others see newness and freshness.<br><br>	Understood this way, garbage provides compelling insight into the workings of American culture, and the trash heap in Players assumes a new significance. Before returning to site of Jack’s death in Players, however, I want to acknowledge one other garbage dump. This one is widely forgotten, but paradoxically, it has had far-reaching historical resonance. It is well known in biblical scholarship that several different Hebrew and Greek words are translated to the English word “hell” in the King James Bible. One of these words is “Gehenna,” which is the Greek form of the Hebrew word “Ge-Hinnom,” or, the “Valley of Hinnom.” This valley was a real ravine to the south of Jerusalem which for centuries before Christ was, first, the site of idolatrous child sacrifices, and later, the site of Jerusalem’s garbage dump, where the city’s trash was burned. Perpetually spewing fire, smoke, and ash into the sky surrounding the city, this valley soon became a metaphor for God’s punishment of the wicked (Keck 436). By the first century CE, this trash dump was, as one Bible scholar remarks, “used by Jesus as the image for hell” (O’Day and Peterson 490). For example, in the King James version of Mark 9:43, Jesus preaches,<br><br>And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched.<br><br>Likewise, in Matthew 10:28, Jesus warns,<br><br>And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.<br><br>The “hell” in both of these familiar verses is the English translation for Gehenna. In other words, hell is a garbage dump. And what is in this hell in DeLillo’s novel? What else is there besides Jack’s charred body, seated in the lotus position?<br><br>	There is a mangy dog sniffing through the piles of trash. There are gulls perched on “mounds of garbage.” There is a bulldozer which levels the mounds.  And, Pammy sees, “There were cans of Ajax and Campbell’s soup, Maxwell House, Pepsi-Cola, Heinz ketchup, Budweiser” (Players 197). What we find here, in hell, in a place that destroys “both body and soul” are the brightly packaged products of America. Bottles and cans, colorful, durable packaging that outlasts their contents. Because the packaging outlives the product, the packaging essentially becomes the product. The soup can is more significant—in the semiotic, signifying sense of the word—than the condensed soup inside. There has been much critical work done on the advent of commercial packaging and name-branding—Rachel Bowlby’s work on the rise of the modern supermarket and Thomas Hine’s history of packaging stand out in particular—but here in Players DeLillo offers the most damning indictment of the utopian promises that circulate throughout American marketplaces. The trash heap is a perverse tribute to name brands, heavily-processed supermarket foods, rigorously standardized, and all, like Maxwell House, supposedly “good to the last drop.” <br><br>	There is something else about the trash in this dump. Campbell’s, Pepsi-Cola, Heinz—these all provided subject matter for Andy Warhol. The garbage dump, it seems, is a tribute to Andy Warhol’s art, which revels in the techniques of mass production even as it critiques them. For example, in the case of Heinz, Warhol constructed plywood boxes and silkscreened them to resemble cardboard cartons whose contents were bound for supermarket shelves. The Heinz boxes were first shown—along with Brillo and Mott’s Applesauce boxes—at the Stable Gallery in New York in 1964, and they were stacked high to recreate the cramped feel of a warehouse. According to Eleanor Ward, the Stable Gallery’s owner, one collector came in “and she took one look, and she ran out...screaming. She said that it reminded her of her mother’s grocery store” (Smith 203). Ward and Warhol had hoped “people would be grabbing things and walking off with them. We had these wonderful dreams about people walking on Madison Avenue, walking north and south and east and west carrying Campbell Soup Boxes. It didn’t happen” (Smith 204). <br><br>	Ward pictures a fanciful scene, in which art collectors spread out in all directions with Warhol’s boxes under their arms, like shoppers heading home from the supermarket. Indeed, Warhol was directly inspired by the supermarket. Nathan Gluck, Warhol’s chief assistant in the early sixties, relates this anecdote about Warhol choosing his theme for the boxes:<br><br>Andy told me “to go to the supermarket and find me some boxes.” So I went to the supermarket and—dumb me!—picked out some very nice boxes. You know: for grapefruit with maybe palm trees or crazy flamingos or…some kind of oranges—maybe, they would be called Blue Orchid Oranges, and the box would have a blue orchid on them. And I brought them back. And Andy said, “No. No. No. Not like these.” And then he did Brillo, Kellogg’s Corn Flakes and Mott’s Apple Juice. And I thought, “Oh, gosh! They’re, they’re…” You know. But I could see his point was to get something that was basically everyday, dull, that you’ve seen over and over again…. (Smith 67)<br><br>It is difficult now to recapture the sense of estrangement Warhol’s art produced at the time. After all, those same boxes which nobody scrambled to buy in 1964 would years later sell for upwards of a half million dollars for four. But at the time, Warhol’s art created a sensation and raised many questions about the nature of art itself. Life magazine wrote about another Warhol showing in 1964 that “Warhol may, in fact, be painting the archetypal 20th Century nightmare—up and down narrow aisles between high walls of brand-name uniformity, with the lights glaring down and the canned music boring in…” (Tomkins 144). With the benefit of hindsight, Stich points out that Warhol’s various boxes “exemplify the notions of high-volume sales, commodity abundance, and package primacy. […] Warhol conveys that mass consumption is as much a matter of package appeal as product appeal” (Stich 103). I would only add the obvious: Warhol transformed everyday things into objects that demand reconsideration. And DeLillo builds upon this process of defamiliarization, creating a disturbing tableau vivant in Players which morphs two iconic images: the photographs of burning monks in Vietnam and Warhol’s Boxes.<br><br>	In “The Storyteller,” Benjamin’s meditation on narration and experience, he writes that the novel—as opposed to the epic tradition—is significant <br><br>not because it presents someone else’s fate to us, perhaps didactically, but because this stranger’s fate by virtue of the flame which consumes it yields us the warmth which we never draw from our own fate. What draws the reader to the novel is the hope of warming his shivering life with a death he reads about. (Illuminations 101)<br><br>The flames of Jack’s death provide no such warmth. His fate might be an epic fate were it not for his surroundings, the bits and pieces of American consumer culture that have outlasted him. In this scene DeLillo creates another Benjaminian dialectical image. Recall Benjamin’s compelling explanation of the dialectical image: in a dialectical image “we begin to recognize the monuments of the bourgeoisie as ruins even before they have crumbled” (Arcades 13). Here, in a garbage dump, in what we might think of as hell on earth, DeLillo evokes the ruin of an American consumer paradise and shows its cost.<br><br>EVERYTHING NAMELESS	<br><br>The violence DeLillo often writes about is the violence carried out by what he calls “men in small rooms”—isolated, alienated individuals like Lee Harvey Oswald, John Hinckley, Jr., or Arthur Bremer, the man who shot George Wallace and supposedly the inspiration for Robert De Niro’s character in Martin Scorsese’s Taxi Driver (1976). DeLillo suggests that these desperate young men turn to violence in order to give themselves a sense of destiny against “the backdrop of brightly colored packages and products and consumer happiness and every promise that American life makes day by day and minute by minute” (DeCurtis 295-96). Jack in Players does not literally haunt “small rooms,” but I believe we can take the phrase to be figurative—living a bounded life, the opposite of Jack’s ideal “unsupervised existence,” encircled by “players” who repeat the same spectacle of the in-flight film, “ridiculous people doing awful things to total fools.” <br><br>	“One way of betraying the revolution,” a terrorist tells Lyle while Pammy is away in Maine, “is to advance theories about it” (107). But it is Jack who best lives out the terrorists’ creed that “theory is an effete diversion. Its purpose is to increase the self-esteem of the theorists. The only worthwhile doctrine is calculated madness” (108). Unlike many of the “men in small rooms,” Jack turns to violence in the most focused way, targeting himself. His “calculated madness” is death, but even in the garbage dump he remains against the “backdrop of brightly colored packages”—as if these packages and what they represent were inescapable. By the time Pammy and Ethan arrive on the scene, Jack is another package among many. He is not a cartoon package of “lacquer” like the unfortunate golfers in the prologue of the novel, but he is a package nonetheless, an inert object, emptied of content. Is death the only escape from the world that hems in the characters of Players? Is the only option to rework oneself into a package, to burn in a fire and “negate all semblance of conscious choice” (Players 198). DeLillo uncharacteristically offers a fragment of hope in Pammy’s reaction to Jack’s death: grief. Not the discourse of grief flaunted by Grief Management Council, but pure, incalculable, unquantifiable grief.<br><br>	Pammy’s initial reaction to the sight of Jack’s body telegraphs an encounter with this kind of untranslatable grief:<br><br>It was driving in on her. It was massing. She felt if she untensed her body something irrevocable, something irrevocable and lunatic, something irrevocable, totally mad, would happen. Nothing had a name. She’d declared everything nameless. (199)<br><br>The repetition of the phrase “something irrevocable”—meaning something that cannot be revoked, something beyond recovery, a point in space or time that, when reached, becomes irreversible—is telling, for it signals a kind of permanence that Pammy does not find elsewhere in life. At this moment Pammy loses language; signification fails her, and Genesis is undone. “Nothing had a name.” Unlike the terrorists that Lyle infiltrates, who spout various high-flung theories about violence and its uses, Pammy possesses no language to theorize Jack’s death. The grief she feels is messy, complicated, chaotic. It cannot be managed. It cannot be filed away by Grief Management or stacked neatly like the floors of the World Trade Center. And finally, it is a grief that elicits no desperate note of sardonic laughter, like the laughter provoked by “the glamour of revolutionary violence” in the prologue of Players.<br><br>CHAPTER 3:<br>Girls, Dreamlands, and The Bluest Eye<br><br><br><br>Who told her? Who made her feel that it was better to be a freak than what she was?	<br><br>	- Toni Morrison, Afterword to The Bluest Eye (210)<br><br><br><br>As long as our country has Shirley Temple, we will be alright.<br><br>	- President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Matthews 40)<br><br>Reflecting upon the impulses that guided her writing of The Bluest Eye in the late sixties, Toni Morrison recalls that her first novel was a response to the “damaging internalizations of assumptions of immutable inferiority originating in an outside gaze” (Afterword 210). Morrison invokes the language of psychology and psychoanalysis—“internalization” and “gaze”—but the problems she tackles are in fact social problems with social causes, which she brilliantly but also subtly exposes in The Bluest Eye, published in 1970. Morrison is certainly not the first social critic to overlay the language of psychology onto a social situation which at its most abstract might be called simply “racism”—a word that does not begin to capture the brutally dehumanizing effects of a white-normative culture. A decade before Morrison began writing The Bluest Eye in order to thematize the outside gaze, Frantz Fanon described in Black Skin, White Masks a “third-person consciousness,” the effect of always viewing one’s body through the eyes of another (Fanon 110). Every movement, every action of Fanon’s body was filtered through the white world. “My body,” Fanon writes, “was given back to me sprawled out, distorted, recolored” (113). This “third-person consciousness” ultimately metastasizes into what Morrison calls “racial self-loathing” (Afterword 210). Decades before Fanon, W.E.B. Du Bois eloquently formulated a similar notion of double-consciousness, that <br><br>sense of always looking at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feels his two-ness,—an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder. (5)<br><br>In this chapter I examine this fragile double-consciousness as it appears in The Bluest Eye, showing how the struggle to reconcile “two warring ideals” more or less fails in the women whose lives Morrison studies. The racial self-loathing which wins out in most cases derives not from racist individuals or segregated institutions as one might suspect, but from a diffuse source far more insidious and seemingly benevolent: American mass culture, the world of mass-produced toys, candies, and films. <br><br>	Scholars have written scores of valuable reviews, monographs, and articles about Morrison’s work, covering a broad range of topics: critical studies on motherhood, slavery, memory and history, music and folklore, narration and storytelling, and so on. Especially since the publication of Beloved in 1987 and Morrison’s subsequent awards—the Pulitzer Prize (1988) and the Noble Prize for Literature (1993)—the range of critical investigations into Morrison’s novels has skewed away from Morrison’s engagement with 20th century mass culture, particularly her treatment of advertising and film. This oversight is somewhat understandable, because on the scale of weighty themes found in Morrison’s fiction—racism and sexism, for example—movies seems almost inconsequential. It seems impertinent to dwell on baby dolls and Shirley Temple when the long shadow of slavery still falls across the pages of Morrison’s fiction. The trivial details of Morrison’s books—say the mention of a popular movie star—seem incommensurate with the larger themes of her writing. Yet, as I aim to demonstrate, focusing on these details does not belittle the ambition or accomplishment of Morrison’s work. The Bluest Eye, which takes place in 1940 and 1941, is intimately concerned with mass culture, and I believe it would be a mistake to discount the ways Morrison implicates consumer culture as a primary means through which her characters are “torn asunder.”<br><br>	Most readings of The Bluest Eye center upon the tragic Pecola Breedlove, who is ultimately driven insane by her desperate longing to fit into American society, represented metonymically as blue eyes. While I hope to contribute to the critical community’s understanding of Pecola, I am more interested in the little girl not broken by American culture, but broken in by it. This is Claudia MacTeer, whose hatred of a yellow-haired, pink-skinned doll metamorphoses into an adoration of Shirley Temple, the real life little girl who symbolizes everything that Claudia and Pecola are not. I am also deeply concerned with another woman who struggles to find herself through the double-consciousness that defines her life: Pauline Breedlove. Pauline is Pecola’s mother, and she seeks refuge from her loveless marriage in the “picture shows,” where “along with the idea of romantic love, she was introduced to another—physical beauty”—a beauty defined as white (Bluest Eye 122). Each of these women copes with her double-consciousness differently, but for now I wish to highlight one commonality: whether a doll or a movie, there is ideology immanent in things, an ideology that violently splits one’s consciousness, forging two irreconcilable “warring ideals.”<br><br>I DESTROYED WHITE BABY DOLLS<br><br>I turn first to Claudia, a nine-year old girl in Lorain, Ohio, who is The Bluest Eye’s primary narrator. Claudia appears to be the one character in The Bluest Eye who is willing to resist the hegemony of white culture. This resistance is most evident when she receives a doll for Christmas. Claudia wonders why it is that “Adults, older girls, shops, magazine, newspapers, window signs—all the world had agreed that a blue-eyed, yellow-haired, pink-skinned doll was what every girl child treasured” (20). “Picture books,” Claudia knows, “were full of little girls sleeping with their dolls” (20), but Claudia cannot relate to the instructive images of girlhood maternalism she sees in these books. The doll is too different from her, with its blonde hair, blue eyes, and pale skin. In fact, she views the doll as freakish—“bone cold,” “hard,” and “patently aggressive” if she tries to sleep next to it (20). Instead of cradling the doll as if it were her baby, Claudia confesses that she “destroyed white baby dolls” (22). To the outrage of her parents, Claudia tears apart her doll, poking out the eyes, breaking off the fingers, cracking open the doll against her brass bed rail. In one of the few critical works to dwell upon the role of mass culture in Morrison’s novels, Susan Willis proposes that Claudia’s violence against her dolls is not only “aimed at the idea of beauty incarnated in a white model. She is also striking out against the horrifying dehumanization that acceptance of the model implies—both for the black who wears it as a mask and for the white who creates commodified images of the self” (Specifying 90). I appreciate Willis’s use of the word “dehumanization,” for a doll is nothing if not the human form dehumanized, reduced to a lifeless, reified commodity. And it is through this commodity that Claudia is expected to mime or enact motherly affection.<br><br>	Another way of thinking about Claudia’s doll is as a hybrid object, a term Gaston Bachelard uses to describe certain objects that produce subjects. In a refinement of Bachelard’s concept, Bill Brown suggests that the hybrid object “may be figured as a participant in the intersubjective constitution of reality” (Brown 942). Brown focuses on a Charlie McCarthy dummy in the Chinese American writer Shawn Wong’s first novel, Homebase, arguing that the narrator of the novel “re-produces himself as subject, triangulated between the object [the dummy] and himself” (943). Objects have interpellative powers in the Althusserian sense of the word, hailing their users with histories and ideologies embedded in those objects. Brown is particularly interested in children’s toys, and he gestures toward a similar phenomenon in The Bluest Eye, noting that Claudia’s destruction of the doll exposes her as a bad subject who fails to identify with a “dominant icon” that offers an “ideal and idealized body” (956). The doll fails in its interpellative function, and leaves Claudia alienated both from herself and from the culture which produced the doll (and which produced the iconicity of the doll).<br><br>	What many readers of The Bluest Eye may not know—and what most critics have overlooked—is that psychologists have in fact documented the interpellative function of children’s dolls, including the effect of white dolls on black children. In the early forties, two pioneering African-American psychologists, Kenneth Bancroft Clark and Mamie Phipps Clark, conducted a series of psychological experiments on what Kenneth Clark later called “the nature of racial prejudices and the effects of these prejudices upon American society in general and upon the personality development of children” (Clark 4). In one of the Clarks’ studies, performed between 1940 and 1941, precisely the same time Claudia struggles with the meaning of the white doll her parents had given her, the psychologists presented a sample of 253 black children with white and black dolls. The researchers then asked the children individually to respond to different requests, such as the following: “Give me the doll that you like to play with the best”; “Give me the doll that is a nice doll”; “Give me the doll that looks bad”; and “Give me the doll that is a nice color” (Clark and Clark 602). The results of the study are startling, even today. According to the Clarks, “the majority of these Negro children prefer the white doll and reject the colored doll.” Furthermore, over half of the children said that the colored doll “looks bad” (608). In a follow-up explanation of the “dolls test,” Kenneth Clark recalls some of the disturbing qualitative findings of that study. Most heartbreaking is his story of a “little girl who had shown a clear preference for the white doll and who described the brown doll as ‘ugly’ and ‘dirty.’” This child “broke into a torrent of tears when she was asked to identify herself with one of the dolls” (Clark 45). Clark concludes from this and other studies that “self-rejection [in black children] begins to occur at an early age and becomes embedded in the personality” (50). Years after the Clarks conclusively proved the presence of self-hatred through sociological data, Morrison grapples with the same problem in The Bluest Eye. Indeed, the little girl in the Clarks’ study who refused to identify with the black doll could have easily been Pecola Breedlove. In many ways, then, we can read The Bluest Eye as the novelized version of the critical sociological problem the Clarks uncovered in their “doll studies.”<br><br>	Lest we relegate the necessity of doll studies to the days of Jim Crow, I want to mention a more contemporary example of a research project aligned with the Clark’s agenda. The differences between white and black dolls have recently been researched by the ethnographer Elizabeth Chin in Purchasing Power, a study of the impact of American consumer culture on black children in an economically depressed neighborhood in New Haven, Connecticut. Investigating corporate toymakers’ increasingly savvy marketing toward specialized race and ethnic niches, Chin looks at the “commodification of race” in mass-produced dolls (few of which, she points out, ever made it to store shelves in the poor neighborhood where she worked) (Chin 145). Concerned about racial stereotypes which might be intentionally manufactured into black dolls, Chin attempts to confirm rumors that Shani, Mattel’s “ethnically correct” black version of Barbie, possesses a “bigger butt” than Barbie. Her technique was, quite simply, to measure the two dolls’ proportions. “I have to say,” Chin begins,<br><br>I felt like one of those anthropologists who, wielding a pair of calipers, had set out to codify racial difference in a scientific manner. Try as I might, manipulating the dolls in ways both painful and obscene, I could find no difference between them, even after prying their legs off and smashing their bodies apart in an effort to isolate their butts from the rest of them. As far as I have been able to determine, Shani’s bigger butt is an illusion. (158)<br><br>Chin unwittingly reenacts the violence Morrison models in The Bluest Eye, clinically dissecting the dolls, reducing them to fragmented objects. But Chin acknowledges what Claudia does not, that we invest a child’s toy with ideology, and while it is possible to destroy the toy, the ideology remains—an “illusion,” but an indelible presence nonetheless. No matter how much difference we may suppose exists between a black and white doll, both dolls “still conform to a white-dominated norm of beauty” (Chin 159). That is, the dolls are statuesquely tall, improbably thin, generously bosomed, and delicately featured. By nearly every measure, from the physical attributes of the dolls to their high prices, they are out of reach for the poor children in New Haven. Chin concludes that “consumption is often for these children not a realm of unbridled fantasy, but rather one where fantasies must be reined in” (176). <br><br>	And yet Claudia eventually gives in to the white model of beauty, accepting it as a standard and even adoring it, although she herself can never possess it. A key moment in this transformation occurs when Claudia realizes that she is beginning to transfer her “disinterested violence,” her indifferent, almost clinical dissection of dolls, to real little white girls. Ashamed by her impulses, Claudia soon convinces herself that she feels a complacent, “fraudulent love” for Shirley Temple. Like her sister, Claudia eventually learns to “worship” Shirley Temple and everything she represents (23). Although Claudia later recognizes that this change was “adjustment without improvement,” she does not appreciate at the time the full impact of the hegemonic triumph that led to the change (23). Willis contends that in destroying her dolls, “Claudia questions the basis for white cultural domination,” yet ultimately “white cultural domination is far too complex to be addressed only in a retaliatory manner” (Primer 109-110). In many ways, then, we can read the events in The Bluest Eye as a failure of what Houston A. Baker calls in a landmark essay “one of [black culture’s] most salient characteristics”: repudiation of white culture, that is, a rejection of white culture in favor of a distinctive black culture (Baker 16). That repudiation fails spectacularly in The Bluest Eye. Yet as Willis suggests, Morrison might take issue with the doctrine of repudiation. African-American culture possesses “a curiously intimate and unhingingly separate existence” within white America, writes Morrison in an essay about the lasting Africanist presence in American literature (Playing in the Dark 12). It is a relationship, Morrison emphasizes, which cannot be unhinged—which can never be fully repudiated, no matter how separate the worlds may be. Claudia herself recognizes the dialectic between the cultures, although she struggles to articulate it. Reflecting upon her envy of the light-skinned Maureen Peal, Claudia realizes that “Maureen Peal was not the Enemy and not worthy of such intense hatred” (74). Is it Maureen’s fault that she embodies a black girl whose subjectivity is more seamlessly integrated with the dolls she plays with? With her “high-yellow” complexion and her braided “long brown hair,” her patent leather shoes, and colorful knee socks, and even her family name, which conjures up the sound of church bells or laughter, Maureen represents the child who has played with pink-skinned dolls, and happily accepted the values these things represent. Claudia realizes that her hatred toward Maureen, like her anger toward her doll, is misdirected. “The Thing to fear,” Claudia knows, “was the Thing that made her beautiful, and not us” (74). <br><br>SHIRLEY TEMPLE’S DIMPLED FACE<br><br>What are these Things that make Maureen beautiful and Claudia and Pecola ugly? One of the most overlooked aspects of The Bluest Eye is the way Morrison intersperses it with the names of popular films and Hollywood starlets. On one hand, Morrison is faithfully reproducing the cultural trends of the late thirties and early forties, in which movie-going was an extremely popular pastime, a dazzling reprieve from the austere realities of the Great Depression. On the other hand, Morrison evokes these film titles and stars to bolster her critique of American culture. The first instance is also the most innocuous. To their giggling delight, the MacTeer’s boarder, Mr. Henry, says to Claudia and her sister Frieda when he meets them, “Hello there. You must be Greta Garbo, and you must be Ginger Rogers” (16). Mr. Henry’s playful affection is welcomed here and elsewhere in the novel (immediately after Claudia wonders about the Thing that made Maureen beautiful, Mr. Henry calls her sister and her Greta Garbo and Ginger Rogers again). But later, when Mr. Henry attempts to touch Frieda, he is revealed to a be a lecherous man. Calling Frieda “Greta” not only measures her against an impossible ideal; the interpellation sexualizes an eleven-year-old child in a way that prefigures (and in Mr. Henry’s mind, legitimizes) his sexual advances toward her.<br><br>	Although Morrison implicates adult stars—and adults who worship those stars—in giving life to the Thing that Claudia fears, it is really another child who is most central to nine-year-old Claudia: Shirley Temple. Claudia formulates a relationship with Shirley Temple as if Claudia knows her personally. And in a way, she does. Frieda has a blue-and-white Shirley Temple cup and she and Pecola often<br><br>gazed fondly at the silhouette of Shirley Temple’s dimpled face. Frieda and she had a loving conversation about how cu-ute Shirley Temple was. I couldn’t join them in their adoration because I hated Shirley. (19)<br><br>I want to dwell for a moment on this idea of cuteness, because it is a concept that puzzles Claudia. Maureen is cute, but not Claudia. Shirley Temple is cute, but not Claudia. What is it about these cute girls that makes them so? What, Claudia wonders, is “the secret of the magic they weaved on others?” What, Claudia wonders, “made people look at them and say, ‘Awwwww,’ but not for me?” (22). The figure of Shirley Temple provides Morrison an entry to these questions.<br><br>	Writing about Shirley Temple as both the embodiment of a culturally-specific ideal of cuteness and an ambivalently sexualized, racialized Other who borders on freakishness, Lori Merish collectively summarizes the characters Shirley Temple plays as “a commodity in search of an owner” (196). That is, Shirley Temple is repeatedly represented in her films as a motherless child, whose cuteness eventually compels those around her to offer maternal love and paternal protection. The paradox of cuteness, Merish observes, is that it “aestheticizes powerlessness” (187). The paradoxical power of cuteness, in other words, derives from its aestheticization of powerlessness. The power of cuteness—its embodied powerlessness—has not changed since the days of Shirley Temple. In a biting survey of modern aesthetics, the contemporary essayist Daniel Harris adds that cuteness “suggests guilelessness, simplicity, and a refreshing lack of affectation” and simultaneously “aestheticizes unhappiness, helplessness, and deformity” (2-3). Harris concludes that cuteness “almost always involves an act of sadism on the part of its creator” (5). For her own part, Claudia feels no need to be powerless, and in fact, she despises the prospect. This may be one of the reasons Claudia rejects Shirley Temple as an icon. To survive a world of white cultural domination, Claudia will need all the guile she can summon.<br><br>	A Time cover story from 1936 repeats somewhat apocryphal anecdotes about the cute, precocious Shirley Temple, who seems to be everything Claudia is not:<br><br>Shirley Temple is actually a peewee paragon who not only obeys her mother, likes her work, rarely cries, is never sick and keeps her dresses clean but even likes raw carrots, eats spinach with enthusiasm and expresses active relish for the taste of castor oil. (“Peewee’s Progress” 40)<br><br>Shirley Temple is the model child, competent, maternal, and cute, and as Merish suggests, this makes her nearly a freak herself. Anyone who has ever been forced to remedy a childhood ailment with castor oil will certainly view Time’s characterization of Shirley Temple as suspect; the description sounds more like a public relations campaign spun by Shirley’s handlers at Fox than objective journalism. Nonetheless, public perception at the time was such that Shirley Temple was adored and idolized by millions of Americans. She was perhaps the most photographed celebrity in the world at the time, and she counted among her admirers Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt. Furthermore—and in contradistinction to Claudia—Shirley Temple knew how to treat dolls properly. Shirley possessed, Time related in 1936, “a normal small girl’s maternal instinct. When she picked up her favorite doll and the doll’s arm came off in her hand, she burst into a fit of hysterical sobs. It took half an hour to calm her” (“Peewee’s Progress” 42). Contrast this reaction with Claudia, who admits that she “had no interest in babies or the concept of motherhood.” When she receives the doll as a Christmas gift, Claudia incredulously asks, “What was I supposed to do with it? Pretend I was its mother?” (20).<br><br>	When Claudia overhears Frieda and Pecola’s “loving conversation about how cu-ute Shirley Temple was,” she is quick to claim that she does not hate the darling Hollywood starlet simply because she is cute. No, she hates Shirley Temple because Shirley Temple dances with Bojangles, a black dancer and Vaudeville star named Bill Robinson, who, as Claudia sees it, “ought to have been soft-shoeing it and chuckling with me” (19). Bill Robinson had appeared with Shirley Temple in a number of films, including the nostalgic plantation films The Littlest Rebel (dir. David Butler, 1935) and The Little Colonel (dir. David Butler, 1935). In one of the few essays to consider the impact of film upon The Bluest Eye, Carole Gerster argues that The Littlest Rebel is one of two films in which Morrison “offers revisionary alternatives to demeaning stereotypes and exclusionary standards” (the other film is Imitation of Life, which I discuss later) (Gerster 191). In The Littlest Rebel Shirley Temple plays the young daughter of a plantation owner, and Bill Robinson plays the devoted house slave who cares for and protects her when the Civil War breaks out. The close relationship between the loyal “Uncle Billy” and the “littlest rebel” is marked with laughter and dancing. Gerster sees Morrison’s Claudia as “an alternative version of the littlest rebel,” who “objects to images of black servitude on the silver screen” (198)—like the sight of Bojangles happily “soft-shoeing” with his little white master. As for The Little Colonel, this hit featured a legendary tap-dancing duet between Robinson and Temple, which took place on a grand plantation staircase. In her autobiography Shirley remembers that Fox cut any scene which had physical contact between Robinson and herself in order to avoid offending audiences. “We were,” Shirley Temple Black states over fifty years later in her autobiography, “the first interracial dancing couple in movie history” (Black 98). Claudia discerns in the relationship between Robinson and Shirley Temple a dynamic in which Bojangles becomes a minstrelized Uncle Tom figure who cares for this cute little white girl in a way that disavows his own race. Rather than dancing with a little black girl, Robinson danced “with one of those little white girls whose socks never slid down” (Bluest Eye 19). The matter is more complicated than Claudia acknowledges, however. As Merish points out, in both films Temple literally “blackens” herself—in The Littlest Rebel with shoe polish as a disguise and in The Little Colonel with mud, mimicking a black baptism—and furthermore, in these films Bojangles teaches Shirley Temple tap-dancing, which has its roots in African-American culture. The result, according to Merish, “problematizes Shirley’s ‘whiteness’ and underscore the racial ambiguities of the cute child” (199). <br><br>	Merish reads Claudia’s rejection of Shirley Temple “as a sign of [Claudia’s] own freakishness” in the eyes of her friends and family (189). I would not go so far as labeling Claudia as a freak. After all, Claudia’s rejection of Shirley Temple is not permanent, nor is it a wholesale public rejection of little white girls. Unable to articulate her intense dislike of this darling little girl that the whole world adores, Claudia explains that she does not like “old squint-eyed” Shirley because, she tells Frieda and Pecola, “I like Jane Withers” instead (Bluest Eye 19). Claudia deftly sidesteps the racial implications of Shirley’s coupling with Bojangles and offers a misdiagnosis that is more acceptable to her sister and friend, simply substituting one white child for another. Jane Withers was another popular child actress, several years older than Temple. Interestingly, the two child stars appeared side-by-side in one film and one film only: Bright Eyes (dir. David Butler, 1934). Bright Eyes is famous for Temple’s signature song “On the Good Ship Lollipop,” and the plot revolves around Temple as an orphaned girl who is taken in by the rich family for whom her recently deceased mother had been a maid. <br><br>	Bright Eyes is an instructive text, especially when we read The Bluest Eye as a willful perversion of this classic Shirley Temple film. Although no critic has linked these two texts, the connections between Bright Eyes and The Bluest Eye are too rich not to insist upon such a reading. Merish emphasizes Shirley’s cuteness as a lure for maternal love, but it is in fact the paternal figure who plays a pivotal role in Bright Eyes. After Shirley’s mother dies in a car accident an adoption battles ensues between the crotchety Uncle Ned and Shirley’s godfather, Loop Merritt, the best friend of Shirley’s dead aviator father, and himself a pilot as well. In Bright Eyes full-grown men fight in court for Shirley’s affection—and the legal sanction for that affection, a battle whose prize might otherwise border on pedophilia. This situation is in stark contrast to the world of The Bluest Eye, in which Mr. Henry is beaten by Claudia’s father for his improper affection toward Frieda while Pecola’s father’s affection takes the form of rape. In the movie Jane Withers plays Joy, the rich family’s snobby daughter and Shirley’s rival, who repeatedly taunts her. In one telling scene Shirley finds in the garbage a doll that Joy had thrown away. Shirley tenderly rescues the doll and tells her, “You should be in the hospital.” Joy then spies Shirley with the doll and possessively grabs it from her. Little five-year-old Shirley tells Joy, “If you give her to me, I’ll take care of her. I’ll wash her face, and make her some clothes, and everything.” Bratty Joy responds to this maternal offer, “You can’t have her. You wanna know why? Because I’m gonna kill her.” Joy then tears apart the doll, ripping a leg off, and then the head, tossing it away. Thus Jane treats her doll with the same kind of violence that Claudia uses on hers, but for entirely different reasons, as Morrison makes clear. Joy does not destroy the doll because it represents an impossible ideal forced upon her, but because she is base, petty, and cruel. Apparently the rivalry between the two girls assumed a life of its own on the set of Bright Eyes. Years later Shirley Temple Black recalled the following incident:<br><br>As cast, Withers was noisy, arrogant, and rich, constantly humiliating me as the shy, stubborn poor girl. For props we were each issued a doll, mine modest and frumpy, befitting my role, and hers a giant glorious Lenci from Italy with dangling blond curls and exquisitely costumed in ruffles and a velvet bonnet garlanded with lifelike flowers. Offstage I admired the clothing, and following her stage role, Withers became possessive, denying me even a peek, clutching it and turning away. Ultimately it developed into a quiet offstage competition for something she really did want, but I did not. (Black 70)<br><br>I quote this passage from Black’s autobiography because it highlights a set of themes apropos to The Bluest Eye: dolls, little girls, inarticulable jealousies. Here little Shirley Temple herself is placed in the role that Pecola is more accustomed to, admiring a doll she does not possess. <br><br>	Claudia’s preference of Jane Withers over Shirley Temple is obviously superficial, an act of defiance more than one of admiration, but more to the point, it is misguided. Outside the diegetic world of cinema, Shirley and Jane are essentially interchangeable from the point of view of Morrison’s character. A debate about which little girl is better—Shirley or Jane—is like a debate about Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola. Both are essentially the same, and to say one is better misses the point entirely: mass culture exudes a powerful normative influence, and for someone like Claudia, resisting the norms depends upon superficial choices which ultimately prove futile. Both white girls are privileged in Bright Eyes—Jane the daughter of a nouveau riche California family in the midst of the Great Depression, and Shirley, ultimately jointly adopted by her loving godfather and the rich Uncle Ned. Both girls have access to a world of social mobility that is unavailable to the characters whose lives Morrison writes about in The Bluest Eye. The title of Bright Eyes may refer to Shirley, but in fact both girls in the movie have bright eyes, as bright as the blue eyes Pecola wants more than anything in the world. Thus even the titles forge a connection between the 1934 film and Morrison’s novel, which we can read as a silent allusion to the Temple film—to the entire Temple cult of personality in fact. <br><br>	More than any other character in The Bluest Eye, Pecola falls victim to this cult of personality. In nearly all of her films, Temple is the agent through which some familial conflict is resolved—marriage partners found, generations reunited, family fortunes reversed (Vered 54). That Temple does not function in this manner for Pecola—there is nothing about Pecola’s ravaged life that Temple can save, and in fact she only serves as an impossible role model—is Morrison’s critique of the power given to this little girl by the mass media.  Merish offers an insightful reading of The Bluest Eye, pointing out that Shirley Temple promises the opposite to Pecola’s own life of motherly neglect and fatherly abuse, which is one reason Pecola cannot seem to get enough of Shirley Temple (Merish 189). When Pecola comes to live at the MacTeer’s because her father is in jail, Mrs. MacTeer complains about how much milk Pecola drinks. “What the devil does anybody need with three quarts of milk” she asks. Claudia knows it is not the milk that Pecola needs; rather Pecola “was fond of the Shirley Temple cup and took every opportunity to drink milk out of it just to handle and see sweet Shirley’s face” (23). Pecola drinks the milk, but what she really consumes is the image of Shirley Temple, as if by drinking from a cup emblazoned with Shirley’s face, Pecola could absorb Shirley’s face, her cuteness, her whiteness. In the same way Shirley Temple is a commodity in her films, ready to be taken in by the nearest adult, she is a commodity outside her films as well, a commodity packaged in cuteness, which Pecola hopes to consume with every swallow of white milk. Like the doll around which Claudia refuses to construct her subjectivity, the Shirley Temple mug is a hybrid object. Unlike Claudia, however, Pecola offers no resistance to the white ideals of beauty. The mug with “cu-ute” Shirley’s face becomes an interface between Pecola and her idealized image of herself, an image she goes mad trying to attain. <br><br>	The blue and white cup which is Pecola’s talisman most certainly exists. Long before Marilyn Monroe, Elizabeth Taylor, or Jackie Kennedy Onassis, Shirley Temple was one of the first female and certainly one of the youngest mass icons, and her image appeared everywhere. In a history of the legal origins and ramifications regarding the corporate use—or licensing—of a personal image, say a star’s likeness, the film historian Jane Gaines identifies Shirley Temple-cum-product as, along with Mickey Mouse, one of the pioneering advances in the history of merchandising (Gaines 157-158). Of course, the difference between Mickey Mouse and Shirley Temple is so obvious that Gaines does not mention it. But it is a critical difference and I will mention the obvious here: unlike Mickey Mouse, Shirley Temple is real; there was a real person behind the mass-produced image. In this age of relentless marketing, when the faces of athletes, cartoon characters, superheroes, and movie stars appear on t-shirts, fast food cups, cereal boxes, toys, and a thousand other disposable consumer goods, it is difficult comprehend the newness and uniqueness of Shirley Temple’s ubiquitous beaming face. American culture had never before seen such an onslaught of personality-marketing. Hollywood blockbuster tie-ins with fast food restaurants are direct descendents of Fox’s savvy marketing of Shirley Temple’s image in the mid-thirties. In her autobiography Black wryly recalls the marketing sensation she became (or rather, the marketing sensation her handlers created):<br><br>Ideal Toy and Novelty Company in New York negotiated a license for dolls, the first model to be patterned on the red polka-dot dress from Stand Up and Cheer. Soon Ideal had contracted for the entire output of the nation’s largest wigmaker. Two large dress-goods firms were consolidated to stitch up costumes. Company employment bounded upward 50 percent, yet production continued to lag three weeks behind the flood of orders…. Before 1941 the public would have invested $45 million in Shirley Temple dolls.<br><br>	Apart from product sales, my face was useful as a merchandising tool. General Mills Corporation obtained a license to use my image stenciled on sturdy cobalt-blue mugs, plates, and pitchers given away as a box-top premium with Wheaties breakfast food. “A sure-fire way to get children to drink more milk,” read the promotion. (Black 85)<br><br>If we were to consider only the above account, it would seem that Shirley Temple single-handedly revived the economy of the Great Depression. She not only provided distraction to millions of dispirited Americans, she actually provided jobs. It is not my goal here to either confirm or dispute Black’s financial impact on America, but I do want to draw attention to the fact that Black highlights two mass-produced commodities that Morrison incorporates into The Bluest Eye: dolls and the Shirley Temple mugs. These items were immensely popular, and it is no accident that Morrison chose them as metonymic enforcers of a repressive ideology.<br><br>	Twentieth-Century Fox doggedly protected the manner in which Shirley Temple’s image was used. At the same time, the studio had license to use Temple’s image in whatever way it saw fit. “Although the studios managed their image properties by trading and circulating them, often without the actor’s knowledge,” Gaines observes, “they also vigilantly policed them so that even if the studio used a star’s photograph irresponsibly, the star could be sure that others did not” (Gaines 160). With her image in wide circulation, the adult Shirley Temple Black recognizes the way she became a model for other little girls, primarily through things, through the accessories that signify girlhood:<br><br>Licenses were awarded for dresses, hair ribbons, and headbands, all to help transform other girls into my curly-haired likeness. Along came hats and berets to cover up those same heads. To cloak the small bodies, overcoats were available with my face on the label. Soap novelties ensured clean hands and faces on those little bodies newly dressed, beribboned, hatted, and cloaked. (Black 85)<br><br>Note how Black uses the passive voice to describe the process through which “little bodies” were encultured: they were “dressed,” “beribboned,” “hatted,” and “cloaked”—all by someone else, presumably proud parents, but more generally, by culture itself. Thousands of little girls were subjected to what we might think of as “Temple-ization” or “entemplement.” Morrison shows the dangers of this process, particularly for those little girls whose skin color predefined their access to popular culture.<br><br>THE DREAMLAND THEATER<br><br>If movie stars are the embodiments of white cultural domination, then movie theaters—where brilliant manifestations of these stars dazzle audiences—are the sites where the domination assumes a three-dimensional presence. Two events in The Bluest Eye which are central to understanding Morrison’s critique of mass culture revolve in and around the cinema, in and around the actual physical space where images of Shirley Temple and other stars came to life. The first event happens so quickly that it is nearly over before we register its significance. As Claudia, Frieda, Pecola, and Maureen walked on one of Lorain’s main streets, they “passed the Dreamland Theater, and Betty Grable’s face smiled down” at them (Bluest Eye 69). The Dreamland is an especially evocative name, for what else is a movie theater but a land where dreams find expression? On the silver screen our dreams are conjured, illuminated, projected. Secret fantasies are enacted by familiar strangers and new fantasies are staged by a unseen directors and cinematographers. These fantasies evolve from a dialectical relationship between the twin pleasures of the cinema, a narcissism rooted in a over-identification with Hollywood stars and starlets, and a voyeurism enabled by the camera’s stealthy eye. The technology employed to produce these filmic versions of reality—the cameras, the lighting, the editing—are hidden. In essence, the dreammakers are disavowed, and only the dream remains, as if it spontaneously sprung from the viewer’s own imagination. The result, Benjamin astutely observes in “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction” is “the height of artifice…an orchid in the land of technology” (Illuminations 233).<br><br>	What is most surprising about the Dreamland Theater is not the theater’s suggestive name, but the fact that Morrison did not have to invent this name. The Dreamland Theater was one of eight movie palaces in the early forties found in Lorain, Ohio, where Claudia and her friends lived. Located at 19th and Broadway, the Dreamland was a 600-seat theater operated by a Lebanese business woman, Nazera Zegiob, who also owned the nearby Elvira, Pearl, and Liberty theaters. A few years before Claudia would have passed by the Dreamland, the theater was completely renovated, and we are fortunate to have contemporary descriptions of this new theater. As the Lorain Journal proclaimed in November 1936, shortly before the Dreamland reopened on Thanksgiving Day after five months of renovations, the Dreamland was “one of the city’s most modern theaters.” The newspaper account spares no detail in describing the luxuriousness of the refurbished theater. The “front, interior, machinery, lighting, heating and ventilating systems, screen, chairs, and practically everything” was completely new. The theater’s new zephyr marquee used 480 bulbs and included a neon fixture, while the theater’s front was covered with “variegated structural glass in blue and white” and the box office was enclosed in “mirror-glass.” The only theater in Lorain designed for the newest innovation in cinema—sound—the Dreamland featured an RCA sound system, the latest technology at the time. The inside walls were covered with elegant “Spanish red imported plush” and the seats were upholstered with “black Spanish leather cushions” (“New Dreamland”). One innovative feature was the “crying room” in an enclosed balcony to which mothers with babies could retreat to watch the movies without disturbing other audience members, an architectural design that suggests that Zegiob was well aware of her core constituency and their needs. This movie palace is the theater that Claudia, Frieda, Pecola, and Maureen would have passed by in the early forties.<br><br>	Only a few years later the luxurious Dreamland Theater would be completely destroyed by a raging fire on a boiling August day in 1947. It took firefighters from four engine companies over three hours to contain the fire and extinguish it. According to contemporary accounts, one employee of the Dreamland survived the blaze only by leaping through a window on the second floor and landing on the marquee. Another occupant was seriously injured when he too “leaped from his office window to the marquee of the theater” and “suffered a severed artery in his right arm” (“2 Men Leap”). A photograph from the Lorain Journal dated August 19, 1947, shows a crowd watching as firemen scale the burning building, the theater marquee in the foreground, announcing the film on that day, The Two Mrs. Carrolls, starring Humphrey Bogart and Barbara Stanwyck. As if to illustrate the impossibility of damming the flow of dreams, the Dreamland was gutted after the fire and remodeled, and a new Dreamland reopened a year later. This latest renovation saw the introduction of “fireproof velour” on the walls and an “air refrigeration system” for the comfort of its patrons, features that would quickly lure moviegoers back to the Dreamland. The main attraction on the opening day was, apropos of dreamlands, Sleep, My Love, directed by Douglas Sirk (“Dreamland Theatre”). This classic melodrama starred Don Ameche as a cheating husband trying to drive his wife, played by Claudette Colbert, to suicide by repeatedly drugging her.<br><br>	Growing up in Lorain, Ohio, herself, Morrison was most certainly aware of the Dreamland’s history, and we might speculate that this particular theater’s rich history was especially important to Morrison, in that the theater possessed a history at all. That is, the Dreamland Theater, unlike many other buildings, possessed a rich and readily accessible archeological past. By referencing the Dreamland by name, Morrison gestures toward the hidden histories of mass culture. Naming a theater that has been the site of both dreams and disasters, Morrison historicizes what many take for granted.  In any case, in the early forties the theater was still announcing itself as a “dreamland,” and Betty Grable graced its billboards. As Claudia observes, Grable intently smiles down upon passersby, as if the dream had left the darkened cinema and conspired to intrude upon the real world, a benevolent vision of ideal beauty. Yet the image of “The Girl with the Million Dollar Legs,” as Betty Grable was known, was not so benevolent, not to Claudia.<br><br>	When Maureen asks, “Don’t you just love her?”—referring to Betty Grable—she phrases the question as if the only answer could be affirmative (69). The question is almost a command, and it is one Claudia cannot abide. Claudia instinctively dislikes Betty Grable, for her looming smiling face joins the procession of judgments issued from “every billboard, every movie, every glance” that accused Claudia—and to a more damaging extent, Pecola—of the crime of ugliness (39). But Claudia cannot articulate these complicated feelings. The best she can do is disagree with Maureen. Hedy Lamarr, Claudia counters, “is better” (69). In the same way that Claudia declares she prefers Jane Withers over Shirley Temple, she cycles through an illusionary array of choices for ideal beauty and settles on Hedy Lamarr, simply because she is not Maureen’s favorite, not because she is substantively different than Betty Grable. Claudia’s answer is not a contrary opinion so much as it is a compromise, a negotiated reaction to popular culture, that, like her adoration of Shirley Temple is “adjustment without improvement.”<br><br>	Maureen deftly defuses Claudia’s oppositional stance by readily agreeing, “Ooooo yes,” thereby exposing the illusion of choice Claudia faces. Then Maureen tells a story that demonstrates that Hedy Lamarr is just as out of bounds for Claudia as Betty Grable. “My mother told me,” Maureen begins,<br><br>that a girl named Audrey, she went to the beauty parlor where we lived before, and asked the lady to fix her hair like Hedy Lamarr’s, and the lady said, “Yeah, when you grow some hair like Hedy Lamarr’s.” (69-70)<br><br>Maureen’s story is an indirect rebuttal to whatever aspirations Claudia, Frieda, or Pecola may have to be beautiful. “Beauty was not simply something to behold,” Morrison remembers thinking as a child in the afterword to The Bluest Eye, “it was something one could do” (Afterword 210). It is easy for Maureen, with her “high-yellow” skin, “long brown hair,” and “sloe green eyes” to be so critical (62). While mass culture teaches Claudia nothing but contempt for her own beauty and her own blackness, Maureen effortlessly has access to white culture’s ideals simply because of her lighter skin. As a result Maureen “enchanted” nearly everyone (62). “Black boys didn’t trip her in the halls,” Claudia fumes, and “white boys didn’t stone her, white girls didn’t suck their teeth when she was assigned to be their work partners; black girls stepped aside when she wanted to use the sink in the girls’ toilet” (62). As a measure of the black girls’ reverence for their beautiful classmate, a reverence borne out of their own self-loathing, “their eyes genuflected under sliding lids” (62). <br><br>EDUCATION IN THE MOVIES<br><br>The most crushing demonstration of the power of the Hollywood images that stare Morrison’s characters in the face concerns Pecola’s mother, Pauline. While the children bandy about the names of movie stars and pass by the Dreamland Theater, it is Pauline whom Morrison places squarely inside a movie palace, where all her dreams are exposed as fraudulent, unattainable, and ultimately, literally, rotten. Pauline provides a valuable insight to the workings of consumer culture, for it is she whose spirit is broken in a way that Pecola’s never is. In her youth, Polly was a rabid consumer of Hollywood romances and melodramas. Her daughter might even be named after a character in the 1934 blockbuster Imitation of Life, directed by John Stahl and based on the 1933 best-selling novel of the same name by Fannie Hurst. Maureen Peal makes this connection when she first meets Pecola. “Pecola?” she asks. “Wasn’t that the name of the girl in Imitation of Life?” (67). When Pecola does not understand, Maureen explains, summarizing the plot of the film:<br><br>“The picture show, you know. Where this mulatto girl hates her mother cause she is black and ugly but then cries at the funeral. It was real sad. Everybody cries in it. Claudette Colbert too.”<br>“Oh.” Pecola’s voice was no more than a sigh.<br>“Anyway, her name was Pecola too. She was so pretty.” (67-68)<br><br>Maureen simplifies the plot, of course. In her retelling of the movie, black is the equivalent of ugly, while the “mulatto girl” is “so pretty.” Maureen clearly identifies with this mulatto, whose name in the movie is actually Peola—a mistake on Maureen’s part, or perhaps on Pecola’s mother’s part. In either case, as Gerster points out, the confusing name change only emphasizes how different Morrison’s Pecola is from The Imitation of Life’s Peola (Gerster 195). <br><br>	Valerie Smith notes that Imitation of Life—both the original 1934 version and the Douglas Sirk remake of 1959—has generated enormous amount of critical interest from feminist film critics as well as from African American theorists. A few scholars, notably Carole Gerster and Jane Caputi, have written about The Bluest Eye as a critical revision of Fannie Hurst’s original novel, an extended example of what Henry Louis Gates characterizes as “signifyin(g)”— a mode of rhetoric which uses repetition and revision to critique dominant cultural practices (Gates 67-68). These critics recognize the underlying tensions of the film in a way that neither Maureen nor Pecola nor even Pauline herself ever could. The first step to a deepening understanding of Imitation of Life is to flesh out Maureen’s summary. Delilah is the “black and ugly” woman who comes to work as a cook and maid for Bea Pullman (Claudette Colbert), a recently widowed woman trying to raise her daughter and run a business on her own. Delilah (Louise Beavers) brings her light-skinned daughter Peola (Fredi Washington) with her, and the four live together, slowly building a life together. Bea soon opens a restaurant selling Delilah’s secret-recipe pancakes, and eventually they begin boxing and selling the pancake mix through distributors, becoming extraordinarily wealthy in the process. Although Bea treats Delilah as an equal, Delilah always retains her servant’s attitude, even insisting on cooking for Bea when she is prosperous enough to hire a servant of her own. Meanwhile Peola runs away to start a new life where she passes for white, much to her mother’s grief. Only when Delilah dies heartbroken for her lost girl does Peola return home and renounce her life of passing. There is little need here for me to rehearse Gerster and Caputi’s arguments, namely that Pauline and her daughter Pecola in The Bluest Eye are direct rebukes to the stereotypes presented in Imitation of Life (Caputi 710-713; Thaggert 196-197). Like Delilah, Pauline is a servant, and even a good cook too. Her employer, Mr. Fisher, brags that “I would rather sell her blueberry cobblers than real estate” (127). Unlike Bea Pullman in Imitation of Life, of course, Mr. Fisher does not sell his servant’s wares. The wealth and privilege seemingly magically bestowed on Delilah is only available to Pauline secondhand, through the movies. <br><br>	After describing Imitation of Life to Pecola, Maureen declares, “When it comes back, I’m going to see it again. My mother has seen it four times” (68). We can imagine that Pauline Breedlove too saw Imitation of Life many times. In the early days of her marriage she is happiest while at the “picture shows.” There, “along with the idea of romantic love, she was introduced to another—physical beauty” (122). Morrison decisively labels these two concepts—romantic love and physical beauty—as “probably the most destructive ideas in the history of human thought” (122). Their destructiveness lies in the impossibility of the ideals they represent. Like Maureen, Pauline believes that physical beauty is measured solely in terms of whiteness, a whiteness she can consume as a spectator in the movies but only as a distant, unattainable object. In one heart-wrenching passage that documents Pauline’s submersion in the world of cinema, Morrison writes that Pauline<br><br>was never able, after her education in the movies, to look at a face and not assign it some category in the scale of absolute beauty, and the scale was one she absorbed in full from the silver screen. There at last were the darkened woods, the lonely roads, the river banks, the gentle knowing eyes. There the flawed became whole, the blind sighted, and the lame and halt threw away their crutches. There death was dead, and people made every gesture in a cloud of music. There the black-and-white images came together, making a magnificent whole—all projected through the ray of light from above and behind. (122)<br><br>Morrison reflects here upon the movie-going experience in a way that reveals both Pauline’s misguided acceptance of cinematic images and the physical process through which these images are constructed and relayed. Film is able to conjure romantic locales—“the darkened woods, the lonely roads, the river banks”—that are welcome escapes from the rundown storefront where the Breedloves live, a squalid building which “foists itself on the eye of the passerby in a manner that is both irritating and melancholy” (33). Music plays in this magical world, from out of nowhere, again a dramatic change from Pauline’s life, where even though her ramshackle house contains an upright piano, nobody had ever “sat at the piano and played ‘You Are My Sunshine’” (35). Most significantly, Morrison repeatedly stresses a sense of wholeness projected by the cinema. The “flawed became whole,” a process at the narrative level of cinema which echoes the formal techniques of Hollywood cinema, in which disparate scenes, cut from reels and reels of film—close-ups, reverse shots, eyeline matches, pans, cut-aways, dissolves—all “come together, making a magnificent whole.” <br><br>	With her descriptions of illusions of wholeness offered by the silver screen, Morrison comes close to a Lacanian reading of the cinema, in which the screen presents an ideal subject, recreating Lacan’s famous “mirror stage.” According to Lacan, the mirror stage is a liminal moment, marking an individual’s passing from the Imaginary into the symbolic order—into language. To the uncoordinated, imperfect child, the mirror offers a pleasing sense of wholeness (gestalt); the reflection in the mirror, which seems so perfect, so complete, a vision of “totality,” is the child’s ideal self. This encounter with a mirror-image is both a structuring moment and an alienating one. Structuring, because the child begins to develop an ego, a sense of “I” in the play between itself and its reflection. Alienating, because what the child recognizes in the mirror is in fact a misrecognition—it is not itself in the mirror, only a reflected image, which will never fully match the child’s image of itself and will always be inassimilable. Lacan poses here the ultimate paradox: what we come to understand as our self is a case of mistaken identity, brought about in part by narcissistic desire and over-identification (Lacan 1-7).<br><br>	Morrison shows Pauline as a willing participant in the mirror stage fantasy, reliving the infantile pleasure of wholeness, before the dominant ideology beats her into submissive acceptance of her status as a marginalized figure. The mirror for Pauline is not silvered glass, but the silver screen. Just as the hundreds of black-and-white shots in a typical Hollywood film are sutured together into a “magnificent whole,” Pauline’s life is momentarily whole in the theater. “The onliest time I be happy,” Pauline says in a first-person segment of The Bluest Eye structured like an oral history, <br><br>seem like was when I was in the picture show. Every time I got, I went. I’d go early, before the show started. They’d cut off the lights and everything be black. Then the screen would light up, and I’d move right on in them pictures. (123)<br><br>Pauline identifies with the images on the screen to such an extent that she imagines herself on the screen, where she can “move right on in them pictures.” Paying attention to Pauline’s description of the movie theater before the show starts, we find the play of light and darkness in the movie theater to be quite significant: “everything be black.” She means, of the course, the theater is dark, but we can also read Pauline’s description to mean that everything is culturally black—African-American—existing in a space that is both dark and private and free from interference from the white world. The darkened theater, before the movie plays, is a space of pure potential, where everything is possible. Immediately when the movie begins—when “the screen would light up”—the crushing ideology of Hollywood perpetrates a beautiful lie on Pauline. She sees “White men taking such good care of they woman, and they all dressed up in big clean houses with the bathtubs right in the same room with the toilet” (123). She does not simply see “men taking such good care” of their women; she sees “white men” and this is in contrast, of course, to her own life with her bitter and hateful husband Cholly, but also in contrast to the black of the theater. <br><br>	Suddenly Pauline’s memory of the “black-and-white” images that “came together, making a magnificent whole” assumes a racialized meaning. The films are black and white, but so are the characters in these films, which almost all incorporate what Morrison calls an “Africanist presence,” whether it is the tap-dancing Bill “Bojangles” Robinson in Shirley Temple’s films or Peola in Imitation of Life. Black and white come together, but Pauline recognizes that ultimately the white men and women in these films come out on top. The reason why the white men can take “such good care” of their women who live in “big clean houses” is because black maids and servants like Pauline make it possible. The “magnificent whole” is underwritten by black labor. Indeed, it is in this same chapter of The Bluest Eye that the narrator describes Pauline’s “good fortune to find a permanent job in the home of a well-to-do family” (127). The language Morrison uses to describe Pauline’s cinema-going experience reappears in descriptions of her work as a maid with the Fisher family. As Pauline becomes absorbed with this family’s daily life, cleaning, cooking, caring for them, her own family fades “like the afterthoughts one has just before sleep, the early-morning and late-evening edges of her day, the dark edges that made the daily life with the Fishers lighter, more delicate, more lovely” (127, emphasis added). It is disquieting to discover how unlike Imitation of Life Pauline’s life is. In Imitation of Life, the maid Delilah Johnson is welcomed into Bea Pullman’s house and eventually becomes a close friend and confidant. Furthermore, her daughter, Peola, is incorporated into the family as well, so much so that she because like a sister to Bea Pullman’s daughter, Jessie. Nothing of the sort happens in The Bluest Eye. When Pecola visits the Fisher house, she sees how her mother’s skin “glowed like taffeta in the reflection of white porcelain, white woodwork, polished cabinets, and brilliant copperware” (107-108, emphasis added). Simply being in the Fisher house, where whiteness literally abounds, transforms Pauline and creates a gulf between her and her daughter. Even Pauline’s name changes at the Fishers, where they affectionately call her “Polly.” In one key scene Pecola visits the Fisher house while her mother is working. Pecola accidentally drops a pan of freshly-made cobbler, and Pauline smacks her with such force that Pecola falls to the floor. Instead of comforting her daughter, who is painfully scalded from the berry juice, Pauline soothes the Fisher daughter, whose dress was splashed by the juice. This girl, with her “pink sunback dress and pink fluffy bedroom slippers with two bunny ears pointed up from the tips” is the embodiment of cuteness (108). In her role as Polly, whom the Fishers call “the ideal servant” (128), Pauline cares more for this “little pink-and-yellow girl,” whom she calls “baby,” than for her own daughter (109).<br><br>	By what process did Pauline learn to hate her daughter and disavow her own race? It begins with Pauline mistaking the ideals she learns during “her education in the movies” as ideals that are attainable for herself. She recalls that “one time I went to see Clark Gable and Jean Harlow. I fixed my hair up like I’d seen hers on a magazine. A part on the side, with one little curl on my forehead. It looked just like her. Well, almost just like” (123). Pauline misrecognizes herself, and the misrecognition is amplified by her confusion of the part for the whole, a confusion of metonymy. She did not look “just like her”—just like Jean Harlow; her hair looked just like her. Or rather, “almost just like”: just as the immersive world of the cinema only lasts as long as the film itself, so too is the experience of looking like Jean Harlow a temporary one, a failed one, even before it has begun. Pauline is no different from Audrey, the girl from Maureen’s story who wanted hair like Hedy Lamarr’s. Yes, society seems to answer back, Pauline can have hair like Jean Harlow when Pauline can grow some hair like Jean Harlow.<br><br>	Morrison does not name the Clark Gable and Jean Harlow movie Pauline watches, but there are several possibilities. The Secret Six (dir. George W. Hill, 1931), Red Dust (dir. Victor Fleming, 1932), Hold Your Man (dir. Sam Wood, 1933), China Seas (dir. Tay Garnett, 1935), Wife vs. Secretary (dir. Clarence Brown, 1936), and Saratoga (dir. Jack Conway, 1937) were all movies from the thirties featuring both Gable and Harlow. Harlow had gotten her big break in Frank Capra’s Platinum Blonde (1931) and until her death in 1937 she set the Hollywood standard for wit, beauty, and glamour. She was the first full-fledged Hollywood sex symbol, and in 1935 Time had even described Harlow as “the foremost U.S. embodiment of sex appeal” (“New Season”, 26). Time went on to suggest that Harlow’s hair—the original “platinum blonde” that later inspired Marilyn Monroe—“has done more than any other one thing to keep beauty parlors busy through Depression” (“New Season”, 26). <br><br>	Pauline presumably could not afford the services of a beauty parlor, but she tried on her own to emulate Harlow. She attended the Gable-Harlow film and “sat in that show with my hair done up that way and had a good time” (123). It is significant that Pauline wants to watch a Harlow film with her hair done up like Harlow. The over-identification of the mirror stage reaches its absurd limit here; rather than the mirror of the silver screen changing to reflect reality, Pauline attempts to change reality to reflect what she sees on the silver screen. It is at this moment, when Pauline attempts what we might think of as communion with Harlow, that she suddenly becomes disenchanted with this image of beauty handed down from the silver screen. Wanting to “see to it through to the end again,” Pauline buys some candy from the concession in the lobby and returns to her seat. She takes a bite of candy in the darkened theater, and her front tooth comes loose and falls out her mouth. “There I was,” Pauline remembers, “five months pregnant, trying to look like Jean Harlow, and a front tooth gone. Everything went then. Look like I just didn’t care no more after that. I let my hair go back, plaited it up, and settled down to just being ugly” (123). <br><br>	In a thorough examination of the role of the sweet in Morrison’s fiction as a signifier of racial violence and economic exploitation, Dayle De Lancey argues that Morrison uses candy as a metaphor for “the psychically destructive white presence” that surrounds her black characters (De Lancey 26). Sweets, De Lancey argues, are a “mental contagion” that pollutes the minds of Morrison’s characters. De Lancey mentions the economic system of production and exploitation that revolves around the sugar industry, detailed in Sidney Mintz’s landmark history of sugar in the Western Hemisphere, Sweetness and Power, but she emphasizes the symbolic role of sugar more than its material manifestations and economic consequences. Linking candy consumption to psychic contagion, De Lancey proposes that Pauline’s fateful concession counter candy “helps to turn the already declining Breedlove household into a space so violent that it helps to bring out Pecola’s madness.” When Pauline loses her tooth, “her feelings of inadequacy reach a plateau that no mimicry will assuage: with her front tooth gone, the white American community’s aesthetic ideal is forever locked away from her” (De Lancey 35). I hesitate to maintain De Lancey’s claim that Pauline’s “big bite of that candy” directly contributed to Pecola’s insanity, but I do agree that the loss of her tooth marks the moment when Pauline fully internalizes the dominant values of culture rather than seeing through them, and she consequently accepts that she is “ugly.” Beauty, as much a commodity as anything else, is unavailable to her—and not simply because she is missing one of her front teeth. <br><br>	Pauline’s decayed tooth is as much a symbol as the candy that seems to cause it. I do not read the tooth strictly as De Lancey reads the candy, that is as metaphor; rather, I see Pauline’s lost tooth in terms of metonymy. The rotten tooth is a symptom whose root cause is hidden far away, the result of a chain of barely traceable events. Despite Pauline’s belief that she “had good teeth, not a rotten one in [her] head,” she did have a cavity (123). According to the narrator, <br><br>there must have been a speck, a brown speck easily mistaken for food but which did not leave, which sat on the enamel for months, and grew, until it cut into the surface and then to the brown putty underneath, finally eating away to the root, but avoiding the nerves, so its presence was not noticeable or uncomfortable. (116)<br><br>A metonymic chain of events, lost forever to Pauline, connects the cause of the cavity to the cavity itself, while another chain of events—the movies, a sugary treat during intermission—connects the cavity to the tooth whose loss in turn causes Pauline to “[settle] down to just being ugly” (123). The lost tooth thus represents a dead-end to a chain of signifiers, the unexpected conclusion to a series of phenomena of which the conclusion is the only means through which the underlying phenomena are exposed. As the narrator proposes, “The end of her [Pauline’s] lovely beginning was probably the cavity in one of her front teeth” (110). <br><br>	Yet we can also read the story of Pauline’s tooth—and I believe Morrison encourages this reading—as a parable about the forces of culture that weigh upon Pauline and upon the other characters in The Bluest Eye. Mass culture, with its ubiquitous images of beauty, is like that “speck” whose “presence was not noticeable” but which eats away at one’s self-image, one’s self-consciousness. The names of Hollywood stars which roll off the tongue of Mr. Henry and Maureen Peal—Greta Garbo, Ginger Rogers, Betty Grable, Claudette Colbert—are like specks of food, seemingly innocuous, but which cause a slow rot in the people who consume them. Morrison continues her description of the cavity’s growth, but now we can read it allegorically, as a cultural assault upon Morrison’s black characters: “Then the weakened roots, having grown accustomed to the poison, responded one day to severe pressure, and the tooth fell free, leaving a ragged stump behind.” (116). But it is not a single speck alone which can result in a “ragged stump.” “But even before the little brown speck,” Morrison writes, “there must have been the conditions, the setting that would allow it to exist in the first place” (116). Quite simply, we can think of The Bluest Eye as an exploration of these conditions. The entire novel, in other words, is a recovery of the conditions that would allow a child, “the most delicate member of society,” to wish so fiercely for blue eyes that she goes mad (Afterword 210).<br><br>	In a recent New Yorker profile Morrison summarized her accomplishments by saying, “I know it seems like a lot…but I really only do one thing. I read books. I teach books. I write books. I think about books. It’s one job” (Als 66). As The Bluest Eye demonstrates, Morrison’s self-assessment is either too modest or simply disingenuous. In addition to reading, teaching, writing, and thinking about books, Morrison watches films, observes advertising, understands toys, and in general participates in American culture. And then she thinks about this culture, its causes and effects. And finally she offers a powerful critique of this same culture, mining a substratum of nearly forgotten or overlooked phenomena—little known psychological studies, seldom seen films, fading local histories. I began this chapter with an epigraph I would like to repeat: President Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s assertion that “As long as our country has Shirley Temple, we will be alright” (Matthews 40). The Bluest Eye is a contentious rebuke to Roosevelt’s statement. A baby’s face is no anodyne, Morrison argues, to the realities of life, in a depression or otherwise. As long as there are elements in our society telling us that it is “better to be a freak” than what we truly are (Morrison, Afterword 210), there will be children—and children who grow up to be adults—who are “torn asunder,” reflected in the mirror of American culture in such a way that in the worst cases destroys them and their dreams, and in the best cases, replaces their dreams with manufactured ideals that leave these children alienated, marginalized, and brimming with self-loathing.<br><br>CHAPTER 4:<br>Tar Baby, Exile, and the Topography of Privilege<br><br><br><br>Since 1971 Son had been seeing the United States through the international edition of Time…. It seemed sticky. Loud, red and sticky.<br><br>	- Toni Morrison, Tar Baby (167)<br><br><br><br>For surely it is one of the unhappiest characteristics of the age to have produced more refugees, migrants, displaced persons, and exiles than ever before in history, most of them as an accompaniment to and, ironically enough, as afterthoughts of great post-colonial and imperial conflicts.<br><br>	- Edward Said, Culture and Imperialism  (332)<br><br><br><br>Tar Baby, published in 1981, was the last novel that Toni Morrison wrote during the seventies. The novel takes place during the later years of that decade and like the other works I explore in this project, it compellingly addresses the tensions between a culture founded on unceasing consumption and the exploitive violence that makes such a culture possible. Acts of consumption per se are largely absent from the novel, however. We do not encounter heartbreaking scenes of consumer alienation like we find in The Bluest Eye. In Tar Baby Morrison appears to have left behind the Pecola Breedloves of the world and focuses more on characters similar to Maureen Peal, Claudia’s “high-yellow dream child” nemesis in The Bluest Eye (Bluest Eye 62). Like Morrison’s first novel, Tar Baby introduces black characters who are torn by the cultural contradictions of a capitalist society in which they are second class citizens. Unlike The Bluest Eye, however, Morrison injects the world of Tar Baby with two pivotal white characters, who are not—like Shirley Temple or Jean Harlow—impossible ideals on a silver screen, but living, breathing, thinking presences in the novel. In this novel Valerian Street is a wealthy white man, a successful candy manufacturer who retires to a palatial estate on a Caribbean island. There he lives with his much younger wife, a former beauty pageant queen named Margaret; his black servants, Sydney and Ondine; and occasionally, his servants’ light-skinned niece, Jadine Childs, a twenty-five-year-old fashion model. The delicate balance of Valerian’s world is upset when Son, a fugitive black American, lands on the island and reveals the complicated ways in which Valerian exploits both black labor and black taste while he simultaneously disavows his role as an American imperialist among subjects beholden to him. Despite her harsh appraisal of the situation Morrison does provide a glimmer of hope for her characters—if only they are willing to see it for themselves.<br><br>	Morrison has repeatedly referred to Tar Baby in interviews as a “peasant story” or as “village literature.” Despite its name, however, a “peasant story” is not a primitive story. On the contrary, Morrison’s novel is complex and complicated, structured around a series of binaries that are forever collapsing and spiraling off into new configurations: city and country, isolation and community, black and white, master and servant, civilization and savagery, and many others. For Morrison, a peasant story does not pass judgments or force conclusions. “The village participates in the story,” Morrison explains, “and makes it whatever it is” (J. Wilson 132). This tactic accounts for Tar Baby’s unresolved epilogue, in which Son is faced with a decision: either to pursue Jadine to Paris or to stay deep in the forest of the Caribbean island, among the blind ghosts of a hundred slaves on horseback who are said to haunt the hills. While Morrison uses the terms “peasant story” or “village literature” to designate a mode of narrative—a way of conveying actions, more or less ambiguously, across time, we should note that “village” also connotes a mode of spatial arrangement, a system of relations between various proximate spaces, a system of relations which is markedly different from, say, those in a city. Morrison’s use of “village” thus highlights what is fundamental to my reading of Tar Baby: the critical role of space and of traffic to and from and within this space. Coded within this traffic, I argue, are patterns of mobility that strengthen Morrison’s critique of American cultural and economic practices, what I am calling the topography of privilege.<br><br>	My approach to Tar Baby is therefore guided by a geographic sensibility. Most of Tar Baby takes place in seclusion on a fictive Caribbean island, disconnected from the larger flows of American life. The cosmopolitan cities of Paris and New York figure in the novel, but only on the periphery. The thematic and geographic center of the novel is the isolated Isle des Chevaliers, in the West Indies. The novel thus inverts the classic core/periphery dichotomy that economists and historians have long used to describe the cultural and economic flow between the so-called First and Third Worlds. In a reading of Tar Baby as a novel of diaspora, that is, as a novel concerned with the forced dispersion and exile of a once unified people, Evelyn Hawthorne reminds us that the “Caribbean material is not used as a backdrop merely, but is an essential part of the meaning and the perspective of the narrative” (106). Hawthorne suggests that Tar Baby reimagines a common African heritage among its many black characters, and her focus on the Caribbean has influenced my own thinking about the novel, which transcends the borders of the United States in a way that Morrison’s earlier works do not. In order to understand better how the Caribbean anchors the narrative, I occasionally subject Tar Baby in this chapter to what the critic Stephen Mamber calls “narrative mapping.” Mamber broadly defines narrative mapping as “an attempt to represent visually events that unfold over time.” When applied to fiction this exercise becomes “a form of critical visualization” which reveals textual nuances that are not always self-evident (Mamber 145). <br><br>	My use of narrative mapping contributes to my larger argument about Tar Baby, which is, again, that Tar Baby is essentially about mobility, a mobility which writ large challenges traditional notions of freedom. It is a mobility inscribed with violence, haunted by the Middle Passage, conjured in Tar Baby through the legend of the blind men on horseback who haunt Valerian’s island. According to the tales told by the people of Dominique, the main island about eighteen miles away from the Isle des Chevaliers, these blind horsemen are “descended from some slaves who went blind the minute they saw Dominique…. Their ship foundered and sank with the Frenchmen, horses and slaves aboard” (152). Some of these newly blind slaves floated helplessly with the current and “ended up on that island [Isle des Chevaliers] along with the horses that had swum ashore” (152). The Isle des Chevaliers and Dominique are both fictional islands in the Caribbean, although Dominique seems to have a real counterpart in the island of Martinique, a West Indian island colonized by France in the 17th century, which remains to this day a French possession. The administrative capital of Martinique is Fort-de-France, while the capital of Morrison’s imaginary Dominique is the similarly-named Queen of France. The population of Martinique is largely composed of African descendents and mixes of African, white, and native people, a legacy of the African slaves imported to the island to work on the sugar plantations in the 17th and 18th centuries (Central Intelligence Agency, “Martinique”). Through the legend of the men on horseback who went blind three hundred years ago Morrison provides Dominique with a similar history, a history rooted in the twin facts of slavery and sugar.<br><br>THE CANDY KING<br><br>While the travails of Jadine and Son form the bulk of this chapter, I cannot properly discuss them without first acknowledging the presence of Valerian Street, whom his wife Margaret calls “the Candy King” (31). Years earlier Valerian’s father and uncles had founded the Street Brothers Candy Company in Philadelphia, taking “a little bit of sugar and a little bit of cocoa” and transforming these simple ingredients into best-selling candies (52). In honor of the newborn baby Valerian, the only male heir to the Street Brothers’ legacy, the brothers even named a candy after him: red and white gumdrops called Valerians. At age thirty-nine Valerian took over the candy company from his uncles and led it successfully until his retirement at age sixty-eight, whereupon he pragmatically sold the family business to one of his competitors, “who could and did triple the volume in two years” (53). Valerian took his fortune and retired to an island in the Caribbean which he had bought “for almost nothing” (53), bringing with him his wife, his long-time servants, and a few (other) prized possessions. <br><br>	Valerian Street is, admits Morrison, the center of the novel. “He’s not the main character,” Morrison told an interviewer in 1981, “but he certainly is the center of the world” (Ruas 101). Notice how Morrison uses a spatial metaphor to describe her novel. She has created a fictional world, and at its center is Valerian, the axis upon which the world revolves. This effect is reinforced by Valerian’s nearly immobile presence in the novel. Throughout the course of the novel he spends his time either in his greenhouse or his dining room; unlike Son or Jadine, whose movements are always in flux, Valerian stays put. As Sidney observes, “He’ll be here till he dies” (11). Valerian is apparently determined to spend the waning years of his life on this island which elsewhere Morrison calls his “fiefdom” (McKay 143), a term that evokes a geopolitical arrangement, rooted in the economic and military realities of the feudal era. It is a term that recalls and revises Daniel Defoe’s story of Robinson Crusoe, merchant, planter, and erstwhile slave trader, who turns his deserted island into a private fiefdom, complete with a manservant, Friday. Valerian too has his servants, Sidney and Ondine. Valerian and Margaret discuss them as if they were vassals and he their lord, exacting enduring fealty. “They are yours for life,” Margaret promises Valerian at one point, reinforcing his status as liege and candy king (31). <br><br>	On this fiefdom of an island, Valerian reigns supreme. He is, in many ways, its creator, in the biblical sense of the word. From out of jungle and hill and swamp Valerian conjured the Isle des Chevaliers, even providing the island’s name. Valerian revises the legend of the hundred blind men on horseback, reimagining them as French soldiers, a regiment of colonial forces instead of a band of fugitive slaves. From this image he extracts the noble “chevaliers.” But naming the island is only the beginning. Under Valerian’s direction the island, which for two thousand years had been dominated by river and rain forest, was radically reshaped to fit human whims. Valerian had purchased the entire island “for almost nothing” (53)—and almost nothing is exactly what it was worth to him. He devoted much of his time to “adjusting the terrain for comfortable living” (53). Under his ownership men “folded the earth where there had been no fold and hollowed her where there had been no hollow” (9). Majestic trees were felled and a great, swift river stagnated into a thick black swamp, called Sein de Vieilles—the Witches’ tit, where, according to local lore, “swamp women” lived, consorts of the blind horsemen. Later in the novel Son likens these transformations of the land to violence against the land, and assigns culpability to whites. Europeans, Son thinks, “in a mere three hundred years had killed a world millions of years old. From Micronesia to Liverpool, from Kentucky to Dresden, they killed everything they touched including their own coastlines, their own hills and forests” (269). This ruthless engineering results in a nature that is not natural. “Wilderness,” observes Son, “wasn’t wild anymore or threatening; wildlife needed human protection to exist at all” (221).<br><br>	Over time Valerian discretely sold large portions of his reshaped island to a few wealthy like-minded individuals, presumably other self-exiled Americans who preferred “French colonial taxes” over “American residential ones” (53). About these distant, silent neighbors we know nothing, the effect being that Valerian continues to maintain an air of lording over the island. The heart of the island is Valerian’s grand-sounding mansion, L’Arbe de la Croix, which “had been designed by a brilliant Mexican architect” and built by unionless Haitian laborers (10). The house forms an intersection of foreign geographic trajectories, a nexus for displaced men who, even though they work together, form no union, laboring with no binding sense of purpose or collectivity. The Haitian men illustrate one symptom of Valerian’s power, which is his blissful ignorance of the labor that makes his world possible. The house itself, the most discriminating guests agreed, was “the most handsomely articulated and blessedly unrhetorical house in the Caribbean” (11). It is an out-of-this-world home built for a First World man by Third World workers. It is curious that visitors describe the house almost as if it were a speech, a public address of some kind—“articulated” yet “unrhetorical.” Like a speech, the house sounds out a statement to the world. What that statement is, we do not fully understand until late in the novel—and this is a point to which I shall return later in greater detail.<br><br>	Even in name Valerian is a sovereign: Valerian is the common form of Publius Licinius Valerianus, the emperor who ruled Rome from AD 253 to 260. We learn the origin of Valerian’s during his first encounter with Son, who is discovered hiding in Margaret’s closet. Valerian invites the intruder to dinner, much to the bewilderment and anger of the rest of the household, particularly Margaret, who imagines that Son is a “real live dope addict ape” prepared to rape her (87). In fact Son had simply fallen asleep in her closet while searching for a suitable resting place on the island. Son, whose given name is William Green, and Valerian exchange introductions, during which Valerian acknowledges his namesake:<br><br>	“Street. Valerian Street,” said Valerian. “What did you say your name was?”<br>	“Green. William Green.”<br>	“Well, good morning, Willie. Sleep well?”<br>	“Yes, sir. Best sleep I ever had. Your name really Valerian?”<br>	“Yes.” Valerian shrugged helplessly and smiled.<br>	“I used to eat a candy called Valerians.”<br>	“Ours,” Valerian said. “Our candy company made them.”<br>	“No kiddin? You named after a candy?”<br>	“The candy was named after me. I was named after an emperor.” (Tar Baby 146)<br><br>Valerian automatically calls Son by the diminutive of his given name, “Willie,” harkening back to social conventions of master-slave relationships that go back hundreds of years. The diminutive at once emasculates Son, interpellating him as a little boy, and reinforces Valerian’s superior social rank, as name-giver, as lord. Perhaps in response to this slight, Son misinterprets the source of Valerian’s name, reversing the cause and effect between the candy and the candy king. By suggesting that Valerian is named after a candy, Son effectively revises Valerian’s history, the source of his power, revealing in truth that it is candy that makes Valerian what he is. Valerian quickly corrects Son, proudly pointing out the imperial roots of his name. Later in the novel both Son and Margaret repeatedly imagine Valerian to have a “head-of-a-coin profile” (see page 202, for example), a stately, noble description which further refines the connections between Valerian and his Roman namesake (and indeed, most Roman emperors did have their profile minted on imperial coinage).<br><br>	Valerian’s “head-of-a-coin profile” notwithstanding, Son is correct in his interpretation of Valerian’s origins. The source of this man’s wealth, the foundation of his power, is candy. More to the point, it is sugar. Years ago his father and uncles had founded a candy factory, and had founded it in a neighborhood where they grew in power and stature as the factory grew. And like appreciative vassals, “the people who lived in the factory’s neighborhood stayed there and loved it there largely because of the marvelous candy odor that greeted them in the morning and bid them goodnight” (52). The allegorical role of sugar in Tar Baby has not been overlooked by critics. The most forceful reading of Tar Baby in this regard comes from Dayle De Lancey, who considers the role of the sweet in Morrison’s fiction in psychoanalytic terms, as a kind of “mental contagion.” De Lancey quite correctly says that Valerian emblematizes “the psychically distorting power of white incursions into black spheres” (De Lancey 27). The same sugar that has made Valerian wealthy has “impoverished and sullied those who, unlike Valerian, are actually involved in its production” (De Lancey 27-28). The end result is that those around Valerian are infantilized—beholden to him for their lives and livelihood—while he himself continues reigning supreme as a seemingly benevolent patriarch —a “Candy King.”<br><br>	De Lancey ultimately likens Valerian to a “drug pusher” whose product “represent a transmission that causes harm wherever it goes,” a description that I think misses some of the nuances of the sugar industry (De Lancey 29). Most critically, De Lancey ignores the real-life demand for sugar, a demand so great that sugar paradoxically became in twentieth century an invisible commodity. Morrison highlights this role of sugar in everyday life by several times mentioning sugar cubes, which Valerian drops into his coffee (16) and Sidney drops into his Postum, an ersatz coffee (35). Even Gideon and Thérèse, poor laborers who live on Dominique, celebrate special occasions by having Alma Estée rush “down the hill to the market for a packet of brown sugar,” which they too drink in their coffee (149). Morrison thus illustrates a fundamental point of Sweetness and Power, Sidney Mintz’s landmark study of sugar in the Western Hemisphere: sugar, once an “exotic, foreign, and costly substance” eventually became “the daily fare of even the poorest and humblest people” (Mintz 6). De Lancey’s reading of Tar Baby is indebted to Sweetness and Power, but in her focus on candy as a signifier of psychological breakdown, she only gestures towards the economic system of production and exploitation undergirding the sugar industry, and in turn, Valerian’s wealth. In many ways, Morrison’s novel can be understood as a vividly imagined gloss on Mintz’s work, illustrating the late effects of British and French colonization of the Caribbean primarily for the sake of sugar production, and the subsequent role of American cultural and corporate influence in the islands.<br><br>THE COPPER VENUS<br><br>I turn now to Jadine Childs, Sidney and Ondine’s orphaned niece, whom Valerian helps to support. On the surface, Jadine’s success as a student and a model seems to contradict De Lancey’s assertion that Valerian spreads psychological ruin. While Valerian represents a static identity—born into wealth, spending his last years at rest in one location—Jadine Childs is mobility incarnate in Tar Baby, representative of both a geographic mobility and a social mobility. Consider Figure 1, a purposely non-representational map which sketches Jadine’s travels throughout the novel. From Paris to the Caribbean, on to New York City with Son, Jadine travels at jet speed. A brief detour to Eloe, Son’s hometown on the Florida panhandle, marks what might be thought of as the nadir of Jadine’s journey. Eloe is the only place unreachable by air; in order to reach this distant town, Jadine and Son “had to go to Tallahassee or Pensacola, then get a bus or train to Poncie, then bum a ride to Eloe for no buses went out there” (244). Eloe is the point which begins Jadine’s boomerang return across the Atlantic. The novel ends with Jadine quickly retracing her path in reverse, returning to New York City alone,<br><br>without Son, then to the Caribbean, and finally back to Paris, first class on a 707. Already several important details become evident with this rough map. First, for a young black woman in the late seventies—indeed for a young woman of any background—Jadine is extremely mobile, representative of the so-called “jet set.” Second, the centrality of the Caribbean is underscored. The Isle des Chevaliers is the waypoint between the Old and New Worlds, a liminal zone that recalls the Caribbean’s earlier role in the transatlantic trade triangle, an exchange point where sugar and rum were traded for African labor. Finally, what is missing from Jadine’s travels becomes apparent: Africa is the hidden referent, an originary space brought into play in Tar Baby in multiple ways but always at a disconnect for Jadine.<br><br>	When the novel begins Jadine has just arrived on the Isle des Chevaliers from Paris, where she had recently graduated with a degree in art history from the Sorbonne and, with no trace of irony on her part (which cannot be said of Morrison), had also recently been a cover girl for Elle. Unlike Polly and Pecola Breedlove in The Bluest Eye, Jadine does not loathe her race so much as she disavows it. Or rather, she disavows the stereotypical signifiers of race, preferring Ave Maria over gospel, disliking hoop earrings, and not bothering to straighten her hair, because it is naturally straight already. Under some circumstances Jadine’s attitude might be liberating, a resistance to the forces of capitalism, which, as Ann DuCille persuasively argues in Skin Trade, “has appropriated what it sees as certain signifiers of blackness and made them marketable” (DuCille 27). But a flashback to an incident in Paris that occurred shortly before Jadine left for the New World problematizes Jadine’s resistance  to categories of race as well as the notion that Jadine has not suffered any psychological consequences from her close association with Valerian. To celebrate her success as a cover model for Elle, Jadine decides to throw herself a party and she goes shopping at the Supra Market for classy, exotic foods—“Major Grey’s chutney, real brown rice, fresh pimiento.... Chinese mushrooms and arugula” (44). In the store Jadine encounters something even more emblematic of postcolonialism than the foodstuff on her grocery list: a “too tall” black woman in a canary yellow dress, her hair bound by an African gelée, her cheeks scarred with “two upside-down V’s,” who commands the attention of everyone in the store. When this mysterious, imperious African woman looks at the other shoppers they see “something in her eyes so powerful it had burnt away the eyelashes” (45). Through this black woman in yellow in a Parisian supermarket Morrison thrusts Africa into Tar Baby, catching Jadine by surprise.<br><br>	In many ways this woman is the inverse image of Jadine, her doppelgänger. Unlike Jadine’s fashion-model beauty, the woman in yellow’s beauty was an “unphotographable beauty” (46). What does Jadine mean by this remark about the woman’s beauty, which calls attention to Jadine’s own photogeneity? To be photographed means to be captured, frozen in a moment in time. This woman, however, with her “skin like tar” (45), threatens to evade any such permanent confinement of her image. She exhibits utter control over her person and persona, proudly displaying her scarification and tribal garments. At the same time, she embodies a cultural consciousness which refuses to betray her Africanness. Most remarkable of all is what the woman in yellow buys in the Supra Market: three eggs, loose from the carton. Despite the cashier’s objections, the woman refuses to buy the eggs in either a dozen or half-dozen package. The woman pays for the eggs with a ten-louis piece and leaves the store, regally “holding three chalk-white eggs in the air” (46). Eggs are, of course, symbols of fertility, of fecundity, and the woman’s purchase emphasizes a sense of wild abundance, for three eggs loose in a hand appear more natural and bountiful than twelve eggs prepackaged in a foam container.<br><br>	This proud African woman, flouting dozens of European social conventions, stands as a reproach to Jadine, and the reproach is most scornful as the woman leaves the supermarket. She turns around and looks directly at Jadine, directing “those eyes too beautiful for eyelashes on Jadine and, with a small parting of her lips, shot an arrow of saliva between her teeth down to the pavement and the hearts below” (46). This encounter leaves Jadine feeling “inauthentic” (48). While Jadine is sophisticated enough to analyze why—she knows she has abandoned aspects of her heritage that others expect her to commemorate—she does not have the insight to question the implications of feeling “inauthentic”: namely, that as long as she follows others’ expectations she cannot be said to be authentic. Instead, Jadine takes refuge in romance, and replaces the unsettling question of her inauthenticity with the question of what man she should strive more to please. <br><br>	In Paris Jadine had been surrounded by “handsome raucous men” who “wanted to marry, live with, support, fund and promote her” (47). Around such men she “needed only to be stunning, and to convince them she was not as smart as they were” (126). Jadine quickly learns which tactics will ensure her continuing acceptance and advancement in her circles: “Say the obvious, ask stupid questions, laugh with abandon, look interested, and light up at any display of their humanity if they showed it” (126-127). Jadine expresses no regrets about stepping so easily into this role as the faux-shallow girlfriend. Men are not the only ones in Paris who shower Jadine with affection; she receives equal attention from women. “Smart and beautiful women,” writes Morrison, “wanted to be her friend, confidante, lover, neighbor, guest, playmate, host, servant, student or simply near” (47). In Paris Jadine is the center of a solar system, and her charm and beauty are gravity, pulling lesser satellites into her orbit. Jadine lives what might be best called an undemanding life, undemanding in the sense that she lives relatively free from social constraint, and she is very rarely challenged (and very rarely challenges herself) to be anything more than an ornament. “If you travel,” reads the copy of a fashion magazine featuring Jadine, “as Jade does in what the Americans call the fast lane, you need elegant but easy-to-pack frocks” (117). The magazine description is typically inane, but it is revealing: Jadine is associated even in the mass media as a traveler, a figure of well-appointed mobility, living in “the fast lane.” Fast, but going where? In a moment of self-candor, prompted by her electric attraction to Son, she admits to herself, “Every corner was a possibility and a dead end. Work? At what? Marriage? Work and marriage? Where? Who?” (159). Morrison’s underlying feminist critique of Jadine’s options comes through at this point. One might imagine that the power of the woman in yellow lies in her self-sufficiency. Whereas the life question for Jadine boils down to who—as in whom to marry—the African woman literally displays a fertility—the three eggs—that exists outside the world of men.<br><br>	By the time the novel begins, Jadine has returned to the New World in order to have time to think about a marriage proposal from a man somewhat menacingly named Ryk. I say menacing because the name is a homonym of “reich,” which conjures up images of genocide in the name of racial purity. Jadine misses such subtlety. According to Jadine, Ryk is “white but European which was not as bad as white and American”—although his name and actions would seem to suggest otherwise (48). Ryk’s Christmas gift to Jadine is similarly misinterpreted by Jadine; she refuses to acknowledge the violence implicit in the gift: a seal coat made from “the hides of ninety baby seals stitched together so nicely you could not tell what part had sheltered their cute little hearts and which had cushioned their skulls” (87). Although later in the novel the shiny black coat becomes a metaphor for Jadine’s blackness, what I want to emphasize here is how the coat also signifies excess predicated upon violence, and how that violence escapes Jadine. She is either unaware or unbothered by the death of nearly a hundred seal pups, clubbed to death to make a coat in whose “dark luxury” she sensuously—one might say erotically—revels (91). It is Son who recognizes the violence embodied in the coat and connects it to larger acts of violence, which he had witnessed as an American soldier in Vietnam:<br><br>…the sealskin coat sprawled on her bed…looked more alive than seals themselves. He had seen them gliding like shadows in water off the coats of Greenland, moving like supple rocks on pebbly shores, and never had they looked so alive as they did now that their insides were gone: lambs, chickens, tuna, children—he had seen them all die by the ton. There was nothing like it in the world, except for the slaughter of whole families in their sleep and he had seen that, too. (Tar Baby 131)<br><br>With a critical eye unfazed by his world weariness, Son paratactically lists the slaughters he has seen—seals, lambs, chickens, tuna, and children—undifferentiating one from another—or so it seems, until he qualifies his reflection by including “the slaughter of whole families” in the list, nothing that there was “nothing like it in the world.” As a Vietnam veteran, Son is attuned to violence in a way that Jadine blissfully is not. Thus despite her exposure to the world and her jet-set lifestyle Jadine naively overlooks how she herself has taken advantage of the violence without weighing its costs. Whereas Son sees the sealskin coat as a shiny scab over the sore of human greed, Jadine mistakes “the seal-feel…too good to let go” as a gift (89).<br><br>	Ryk sends Jadine his gift while she is visiting her aunt and uncle, and this visit forms the thematic core of the novel. It is there on a tropical island in the Caribbean that Jadine begins to confront the ways in which her very mobility may in fact alienate her from herself, from her family, and from an entire culture past. In many ways Jadine is Morrison’s reworking of a Shirley Temple character, the kind of adorable girl The Bluest Eye’s Pecola might wish she could become. Like many of the characters played by Shirley Temple, Jadine is an orphan, and like Shirley Temple, Jadine’s orphaned state elicits a strange blend of maternal affection and paternal protection from the adults in her life. After her parents die she is raised by her Uncle Sydney and Aunt Ondine, and she becomes the recipient of her aunt and uncle’s employer’s munificence. Like some benefactor from a Dickens’ novel, Valerian Street becomes Jadine’s patron. “Paid for my travel, my lodgings, my clothes, my schools,” Jadine tells Son (118).  In the same way she accepts the pelts of ninety dead seals as a gift, Jadine takes Valerian’s generosity at face value, ignoring the damage it might be doing to her. Again, it is Son who is more sensitive to the violence of inauthenticity than Jadine. However expensive her education is, it is worthless in Son’s opinion. “The truth is,” Son argues, “that whatever you learned in those colleges that didn’t include me ain’t worth shit” (264). During a vicious fight in which Son thrusts Jadine through a window, only holding onto her by her fists, he screams that “until you know about me, you don’t know nothing about yourself” (264).  Son uses himself as a stand-in for a black culture that is segregated, denigrated, and “appropriated, marketed, and trivialized into decor” by the white world (168), embodied in a single person by the disdainful Valerian Street.<br><br>	Even though Jadine refers to Valerian as a “rich old pushover” (47), her sense of entitlement blinds her to certain aspects of Valerian’s personality. Valerian is proud that his “politics were always rational and often humane“ (54), but notice how “always rational” and “often humane” do not necessarily overlap; his “rational” politics might sometimes not be humane. I am in no way suggesting that Valerian’s intentions toward Jadine were less than honorable, but I do believe it is important to remember that Valerian is a businessman, and it is likely that he views Jadine as much an investment as charity. Son later questions Valerian’s generosity, measuring it against the hardships it imposes. “Did he do anything hard for you?” Son asks Jadine. “Did he give up anything important for you?” (263). The answer is unequivocally no. Indeed both Jadine’s given name and her nickname as a model belie her potential as an asset or a source of wealth. Her given name, often shortened to Jade, already signifies something precious and rare, a gem dug from the earth, harder than steel, highly sought after for its emerald beauty. It is no coincident that Jadine’s nickname also signifies a precious natural resource. While Son is skulking about Valerian’s estate he overhears Thérèse mention the “copper Venus.” Son asks Jadine about this during one of their first encounters: “Who’s the copper Venus?” he asks. It is a “publicity thing,” Jadine tells him. “When I was modeling they called me that” (115). This is the only time in the novel that Jadine’s sobriquet is mentioned, but it is a key moment that highlights the economic exchanges underwriting the relationship between Jadine and Valerian. Like jade, copper too is a precious resource, mined from the earth. Copper is not a gem like jade, but it is nonetheless extremely valuable, notable for its malleability and conductibility, essential for any electrical enterprise. As an adjective, “copper” recalls a reddish-brown color, the color of the ideal tan as marketed by Coppertone Sun Lotion. Neither black nor white, copper skin tone is an in-between state which captures Jadine’s own heritage. Jadine’s last name bears mentioning as well. Just as Copper is a revision of Jade, Venus is a rewriting of Jadine’s family name, Childs. Venus sexualizes the child, transforming her from an innocent youth to a knowing, seductive adult. The sum total of this name change is to mark the to-be-looked-at-ness of Jade. In her aunt Ondine’s words, Jadine’s face in the pages of a magazine was the “prettiest thing I ever saw. Made those white girls disappear. Just disappear right off the page” (40). <br><br>	Returning to the narrative map that highlights Jadine’s mobility, I want briefly to consider her experience in New York City, where she trades one island for another. Leaving behind the confining Caribbean and the increasingly judgmental gaze of her aunt and uncle, who question her relationship with Son, Jadine experiences an initial euphoria upon arriving in the city, a sense of homecoming. Jadine reflects that “if ever there was a black woman’s town, New York was it” (222). Yet Jadine has so very little in common with the black women she associates with the city, those legions of rank-and-file bureaucrats, black women who make the city run:<br><br>Snapping whips behind the tellers’ windows, kicking ass at Con Edison offices, barking orders in the record companies, hospitals, public schools. They refused loans at Household Finance, withheld unemployment checks and drivers’ licenses, issued parking tickets and summonses. Gave enemas, blood transfusions and please lady don’t make me mad. They jacked up meetings in boardrooms, turned out luncheons, energized parties, redefined fashion, tipped scales, removed lids, cracked covers and turned an entire telephone company into such a diamondhead of hostility the company paid you for not talking to their operators. (222)<br><br>Jadine imagines the power of these black women in terms of denial and minor torments, the administration of the unpleasurable—enemas and parking tickets. Jadine optimistically vows that Manhattan “would be her city too” (222). However, Jadine cannot match that level of hostility which transforms working black women into micronodes of power, whose very hostility is in fact an act of resistance against white-dominated society.<br><br>	The reason is that Jadine’s work is different from these women’s work. While the black women in New York City labor, Jadine’s job is simply to be on display. In New York she earns $2,500 for “four walks [down the runaway] and a picture spread all in two weeks” (223-224). This kind of economic activity is also at odds with what Jadine sees in Eloe, the farthest she travels from New York in the United States. Jadine facetiously imagines Eloe to be a town of nothing but “gas stations, dust, heat, dogs, shacks, general store with ice coolers full of Dr Pepper” (172). There are no shacks in Eloe, Son corrects her. “There are ninety houses in Eloe. All black” (172). Son describes Eloe as a utopic community. No white people live there, and there is not even a mayor because the town “runs itself” (172). The town is so isolated from mainstream America—and from the bureaucratic system Jadine imagines in New York City—that its newborns are not even issued birth certificates (174). In Eloe the people fish, farm, and work in the gas fields—all activities intimately connected to the land and its resources, unlike the labor that Valerian’s factories demand or the labor of Jadine’s profession. <br><br>	Jadine is at a loss in Eloe until she finds comfort through the lens of a camera, subjecting the inhabitants to the same to-be-looked-at-ness that is one of Jadine’s enduring traits. We see this to-be-looked-at-ness when the town’s men watch her snapping photographs of children posing on the street. The men around her “were enjoying the crease in her behind so clearly defined in the sunlight, click, click” (250). The only way Jadine can relate with the residents of Eloe is through the flirtatious chatter of a fashion photographer:<br><br>“Beautiful,” she said. “Fantastic. Now over here,” click click. “Hey, what’d you say your name was? Okay, Beatrice, could you lean up against the tree?” click, click. “This way. Beautiful. Hold it. Hooooold it. Heaven,” click click click click. (251)<br><br>During the rest of her awkward visit to Eloe, Jadine continues to alternate between gawking tourist and superior photographer. She “photographed everything…until she was out of film” (257). Ironically, these photographs ultimately pollute Son’s memory of Eloe. Son later finds the developed photographs and he is struck by what could be called a failure of nostalgia. His town, his family and friends “all look miserable in the photographs, sad, poor and even poor-spirited” (295). In the photos he saw “Beatrice, pretty Beatrice…. She looked stupid. Ellen, sweet cookie-faced Ellen, the one he always thought so pretty. She looked stupid” (272-273). Son’s idealized version of Eloe fades as he realizes that everyone there “looked stupid, backwoodsy, dumb, dead…” (273). This is perhaps Jadine’s most grievous offense in the novel, to corrupt Son to the point that he no longer feels a connection to the only town in the United States he has ever really called home. The “people and places he had loved” seem diminished and inaccessible, lost to him through Jadine’s relentless photography (294). Susan Sontag writes that tourists “feel compelled to put the camera between themselves and whatever is remarkable that they encounter. Unsure of other responses, they take a picture” (Sontag 10); the camera, in other words, mediates alien experiences. This is certainly the case with Jadine. But something far more distancing—and devastating—happens to Son. The photographs alienate him from the ordinary, cutting Son off from much of what he holds dear. With her photographs Jadine uproots an already rootless man, so much so that he buys into Jadine’s spiteful final impression of Eloe, which hinges upon the lack of mobility of its citizens: “All that Southern small-town country romanticism was a lie, a joke, kept secret by people who could not function elsewhere” (259). <br><br>CHAIN-GANG HAIR<br><br>The critical question now becomes this: is Son one of those people “who could not function elsewhere”? Morrison makes it clear throughout the novel—and especially with the ending on Isle des Chevaliers—that Son can indeed function outside the bounds of Eloe, and perhaps, in a hopeful reading of Tar Baby, he can function almost anywhere, even those places Jadine fears. Through Son, Morrison introduces a mobility that challenges and undercuts Jadine’s own mobility. Indeed, Son’s critical eye forms the basis of much of Morrison’s indictment of what I am calling the topography of privilege. It is interesting that Son should be so attuned to power relations between the elite and the subaltern, because he himself is viewed by the whites in terms of his own power, a power rooted in his blackness. The metonym for this power is Son’s dreadlocked hair, which to Jadine is so alive it “looked overpowering” (113). Jadine compares Son’s hair to “bundles of long whips or lashes that could grab her and beat her to jelly” (113). Jadine sees his hair as threatening, an implement of torture. In a psychological process akin to transference, Jadine mistakenly attributes to Son a power that could threaten her own freedom and social mobility: she imagines his hair to be a bloody whip, perhaps that of a slave driver. Feeling an “authentic loathing” toward Son (126), Jadine equates Son’s hair with savagery—it is “wild, aggressive, vicious” (113). And finally and most critically, Jadine associates Son’s hair with imprisonment, describing it as “Mau Mau, Attica, chain-gang hair” (113). Linked to both wildness and incarceration, Son’s hair is thus a site of paradoxical meaning, which I want to touch upon because it illuminates my larger argument about violence and mobility in Tar Baby. His wild hair is nearly the opposite of Jadine’s, which, as it appeared on a fashion magazine cover, was “pressed flat to her head, pulled away from her brow revealing a neat hairline” (116). Jadine’s hair is all control; she does not even have to straighten it (48). Son, in short, is an affront to Jadine’s proper and cultured, poised and graceful bearing. He seems to be the embodiment of all that Jadine fears—and this is the root of her loathing. Perhaps because the “authentic loathing” highlights her own inauthenticity, Jadine strives to suppress and to distance herself from this fear and from “the fear of fear” (126).<br><br>	It is ironic that Jadine connects Son’s hair to Attica, the infamous New York state prison, which in the seventies became the watchword for much of what was wrong with the American penal system—and by extension with race relations in America. In September 1971 hundreds of inmates took over the Attica Correctional Facility, demanding better facilities, adequate medical care, and access to educational opportunities. After a standoff of several days, state troopers and the national guard launched an assault on the prison, killing thirty-nine people, including many of the hostages. At the time it was, as the official report of the New York State Commission on Attica, puts it, “the bloodiest one-day encounter between Americans since the Civil War” (New York State Special Commission on Attica xi). A quick survey of Attica’s population is enough to reveal the social imbalances which contributed to the explosive atmosphere of the prison. According to official figures, the inmates were 54 percent black, 37 percent white, and almost 9 percent Hispanic. In addition, nearly all of the prisoners were from the ghettos of New York’s cities. Meanwhile all of the correction officers were white and predominately from the rural parts of New York—where the state’s prisons are located. As a result of this mix an inescapable fact of daily life at Attica was racism. The relatively enlightened state commission on Attica recognized—too late—the power of this racism, noting in its report on the tragedy, <br><br>Racism was manifested in job assignments, discipline, self-segregation in the inmate mess halls, and in the daily interaction of inmate and officer and among the inmates themselves. There was no escape within the walls from the growing mistrust between white middle America and the residents of urban ghettos. Indeed, at Attica, racial polarity and mistrust were magnified by the constant reminder that the keepers were white and the kept were largely black and Spanish-speaking.” (New York State Special Commission on Attica 3-4)<br><br>The tragedy was fresh enough in Jadine’s mind that she evokes it in her descriptions of Son, which are laden with irony. Most importantly, Son is not a prisoner and never has been. But—the primary reason for his itinerant lifestyle is that he is on the run from the law. Having accidentally killed his unfaithful wife and wanted for second degree murder, Son fled the states. For eight years Son was a man without a home, a man without a documented identity. If the prison system—to which Son could have been bound and to which Jadine instinctively (and stereotypically) links him—if the prison system is a system committed to observation, order, and documentation, as Foucault persuasively argues in Discipline and Punish, Son is an elusive counter-force to this system.<br><br>	Simply consider how Son spends his first nights on the Isle des Chevaliers, wandering throughout L’Arbe de la Croix—a “house of sleeping humans” (43)—observing its occupants, working outside a system that normally would have devoted an inordinate amount of energy to surveilling him. Son’s is a slippery human presence, and in his fugitivity he evades the prison designed to record, document, and reduce him to a number. Instead of going to prison, Son joined “an international legion of day laborers and musclemen, gamblers, sidewalk merchants, migrants, unlicensed crewmen on ships with volatile cargo, part-time mercenaries, full-time gigolos, or curbside musicians” (166). Like all of these itinerant men, Son shares a “refusal to equate work with life and an inability to stay anywhere for long” (166). He had “seven documented identities” and “a few undocumented ones” through the years (139), and the very proliferation of identities renders him almost identity-less. To most of society Son’s identity is an afterthought; he is a black man, nothing more. His friends and family call him Son but he has no birth certificate. His Social Security card reads “William Green,” but he also has one that says “Herbert Robinson,” and one that says “Louis Stover” (174). When he finally returns to the states with Jadine, it is with Gideon’s borrowed passport, an easy subterfuge, since “one black face would look like another and a difference of twenty years would not be noticed in a black man’s five-year-old passport” (218). All of these selves are “fabrications of the moment, misinformation required to protect Son from harm” (119). The plethora of identities shield Son, rendering him invisible. But does this invisibility give him power?<br><br>	In many ways Son is an iconic figure of the twentieth century—“propertyless, homeless, sought for but not after” (166). Undocumented and uncounted, Son is a marginal figure, whose fate, however, is not simply a product of personal whims. In Culture and Imperialism, Edward Said’s incisive account of the interplay between the imperialism of Great Britain, France, and the United States and their literatures, Said remarks that it is<br><br>one of the unhappiest characteristics of the age to have produced more refugees, migrants, displaced persons, and exiles than ever before in history, most of them as an accompaniment to and, ironically enough, as afterthoughts of great post-colonial and imperial conflicts. (Said 332)<br><br>Said’s vision broadens Morrison’s already expansive vision of African-American life and situates Son among larger historical circumstances. Son is a “displaced” person in more ways than one, and that displacement is ultimately a legacy of centuries of slave trade across the Atlantic—one of the great but overlooked colonial efforts of the millennium. In the late seventies Son appears far-removed from this forced migration, but I think we can read Son’s undocumented, shifting lifestyle as a continuation of the slave trade that uprooted his forebears generations earlier. <br><br>	Despite Son’s less-than-noble self-exile, he develops during his travels an outsider’s perspective of his country, informed by a postcolonial sensibility. Consider how he receives news of America, and what that news conveys to him about his homeland:<br><br>Since 1971 Son had been seeing the United States through the international edition of Time, by way of shortwave radio and the views of other crewmen. It seemed sticky. Loud, red and sticky. (167)<br><br>Son reads the international edition of Time, a quick perusal of which reveals it to be not so very different from the American edition of Time. After all, both are products of Time Warner (which in the seventies was actually two separate entities: Time, Inc. and Warner Brothers). Time, Incorporated’s eponymous magazine was founded in 1923 by the journalist Henry Luce, the same man who famously proclaimed after World War Two that the twentieth century would be “The American Century,” in which capitalism and democracy would ultimately reign supreme. In the American Century, Luce wrote, “American interests shall be respected, American citizens entitled to trade and live in every corner of the globe, American business ideals recognized wherever the trader goes” (qtd. in Baughman 23). Both the domestic and international editions of Time are effectively documents of “The American Century.” The international edition of Time merely presents American culture and influence writ large, with a noticeable tendency to include stories about nations around the world only if they relate somehow to American interests. We must therefore presume that “loud, red and sticky” is not Time’s narrative perspective of America, but Son’s critical reading of the words and images he sees in the venerable news magazine. The country appears to Son as a killing field, seeped in blood. “Its fields spongy, its pavements slick with the blood of all the best people,” thinks Son (167). By the late seventies Son had any number of events from which to draw these images of a blood red, sticky, spongy America. The characters in Tar Baby seem to exist outside the civil rights movement, but surely Son is referring at least in part to the deaths of Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, and even the Kennedys when he laments that as “soon as a man or woman did something generous or said something bold, pictures of their funeral lines appeared in the foreign press” (167). To Son the country appears to feed on itself, swallowing in a flush of blood whatever radical potential any single individual promises.<br><br>	This image of a cannibalistic country is reinforced by a former shipmate of Son’s, a Mexican crewman who gives Son a satirical drawing of Uncle Sam. Unlike the familiar version of a stern Uncle Sam featured on army recruiting posters, this Uncle Sam had an open mouth, in which appeared “a map of the U.S. as an ill-shaped tongue ringed by teeth and crammed with the corpses of children” (167). Here we have another map, surreally detailed on the tongue of Uncle Sam, that exposes most baldly the topography of privilege critiqued in Tar Baby. The map presents the United States as a tongue—the critical organ of speech and power and, when extended through the lips, a sneering, contemptuous gesture of superiority. The ring of teeth form a barrier between the United States and its neighbors; I imagine them as pikes on which are heaped “the corpses of children.” We might see these rotting children as both American and foreign nationals—any child whose labor perpetuates American dominance, any child whose death provides grist for the mill of American power. The occasion for the Mexican’s gift is Son’s violent outburst at a fish he had caught off the prow of their vessel. In a dying spasm the fish flopped from the deck into the air and slapped Son in the face. Angered and humiliated, Son “bashed with his fist the snapper’s head” (167). An outsider to American politics but a keen observer (and unwilling subject) of American foreign policy, the Mexican tells Son that Son is an “Americano. Cierto Americano. Es verdad” (167)—which might be translated roughly as “[You are] American. Certainly American. It’s true.” And then the Mexican presents Son the mock gift drawing that illustrates the violent nature of the United States, an Uncle Sam whose mouth is a rotten country, filled with death and destruction but buffered from the consequences by the corpses of its and others’ children, who are sacrificed in the name of freedom and capitalism, the foundations of the “American Century.”<br><br>THE TOPOGRAPHY OF PRIVILEGE<br><br>Morrison’s representation and excavation of the topography of privilege is Tar Baby’s greatest achievement. I have argued that at issue in the novel is mobility—both a spatial mobility and a social mobility, a fluidity of class and race. The term “topography” is a useful one for capturing the sense of different spaces of privilege in Tar Baby, and more importantly, for invoking a sense of relations between the constitutive parts of Tar Baby—the West Indies, New York City, Paris, Eloe. The best way to understand these contours of the topography of privilege is to revisit Valerian Street and his apparent power, for it is Valerian who best represents the most insidious form of American dominance, less visible than the outright death and destruction of warfare, but just as violent, predicated upon exploited labor on a global scale. Like Son, Valerian is a veteran (of World War Two) and he too has answered the call of Uncle Sam. But whereas Valerian joined a war with greater moral clarity than Son, his life after the war has positioned him just as solidly as an Americano of privilege on the bloody map in Uncle Sam’s mouth. <br><br>	Morrison’s full revelation of Valerian’s position in the topography of privilege occurs during Christmas dinner at L’Arbe de la Croix. Despite Valerian’s belief that one should not “consort” with the servants (59)—as Valerian directs Margaret in the early years of their marriage—everybody in Valerian’s household sits down together for Christmas dinner: Valerian and Margaret, Sidney and Ondine, Jadine, and Son. All of them are indebted in one way or another to Valerian. Sidney and Ondine are his faithful—albeit privately scornful—employees who have for years profited from his generosity, receiving stocks and Social Security benefits from him. Jadine attended all the best schools and wore all the best clothes, thanks to Valerian’s patronage. Even Son was given money for a suit and treated by Valerian as a guest of honor, welcomed to L’Arbe de la Croix almost as if he were a prodigal son returning home, a substitute for Valerian’s own absent son, Michael. Yet it is Son who directly challenges Valerian. The challenge begins when Son questions Valerian’s decision to fire Gideon and Thérèse, whom Valerian knows only as Yardman (the gardener and handyman) and Mary (the laundress). Son’s challenge quickly blossoms to encompass the entire ideological foundation upon which Valerian has built his life. <br><br>	Valerian had fired Gideon and Thérèse on Christmas Eve for stealing apples shipped from the United States to the Caribbean courtesy of the American consulate on Dominique. The pair of workers took the apples because apples are literally forbidden on Dominique, considered “contraband” by French custom officials, who only permit the importation of French-grown produce (109). Behind every apple lies a complicated network of colonial rule and international trade and the person who pays the price is a nearly blind black woman and her nephew. While the attempted theft of a handful of apples from an entire crate marks a critical turning point in our understanding of Valerian and American power, the apples are much more than a convenient plot contrivance. The story of the apples establishes a direct allusion to the Garden of Eden story and highlights the important role of exile in the novel. Gideon and Thérèse, who are already displaced and forgotten legacies of French colonialism and the African slave trade, are ejected from L’Arbe de la Croix much as Adam and Eve are cast from the Garden of Eden for taking the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. According to this metaphor, then, Valerian is the lawgiver, God. Of course, even if Valerian is its chief creator, the Isle des Chevaliers is not the Garden of Eden—it is a tropical island, torn up to make space for the mansion of an aging candy tycoon.<br><br>	Still, if apples are the forbidden fruit on Valerian’s island, what is the knowledge they hold? I will venture to say it is the knowledge of America. After all, the apples are intended for apple pies, dessert for Christmas dinner. As the cliché goes, what could be more American than apple pie? By the power of metonymy the apples stand-in for a piece of America. To have a taste of apples is to have a taste of America, in all of its bloody red delicious glory. Thérèse associates apples with the United States and yet paradoxically she had a “craving for them akin to hysteria” (109). Until Gideon returned from life in the United States in 1973, smuggling a dozen apples in “the lining of his electric blue leisure suit,” Thérèse had tasted apples only twice in her life—once at age seven and again at thirty-five. At one point, angry with the men and women of the Isle des Chevaliers, Thérèse curses them under her breath, saying that “you can go back to the States the whole pack of you and choke to death on your big red apples” (112). This curse captures the ambivalence Thérèse feels toward the United States, at once a place of abundance, where apples are as common as the coffee plants on her own island, and a place of threatening violence. America simultaneously fascinates and repulses Thérèse, and she cannot stop thinking about that world so far away (for her). Mangling the stories she has heard from Gideon and other visitors to the States, she believes that “America was where doctors took the stomachs, eyes, umbilical cords, the backs of the necks where the hair grew, blood, sperm, hearts and fingers of the poor and froze them in plastic packages to be sold later to the rich” (151).<br><br>	While Thérèse muddles some of the facts, she is essentially correct in her assessment of America. The blood of the poor feeds the lives of the rich. And with the presence of Valerian on Isle des Chevaliers, this historical fact of capitalism has been imported to the Caribbean. His firing of Thérèse and Gideon reenacts the same transaction in which the bodies of the poor cater to the whims of the rich. Son confronts Valerian at dinner with this truth:<br><br>	“…So I fired them [Valerians explains]. Those apples came at great expense and inconvenience from the consulate. I don’t see what the problem is.”<br>	“Inconvenience for whom?” Son asked. “You didn’t go and get them. They did. You didn’t row eighteen miles to bring them here. They did.” (205)<br><br>Son demonstrates that Valerian’s actions are part of a larger pattern of exploited labor and essentially stolen resources, revealing the reality about the seemingly kindly and supportive Valerian: <br><br>he had been able to dismiss with a flutter of the fingers the people whose sugar and cocoa had allowed him to grow old in regal comfort; although he had taken the sugar and cocoa and paid for it as though it had no value, as though the cutting of cane and picking of beans was child’s play and had no value; but he turned it into candy. (202-203)<br><br>And that candy had allowed Valerian to buy an entire island in the Caribbean, the source of his wealth, and dismiss local blacks as though they were thieves. In Son’s estimation, however, it is Valerian who is the thief, even though he is at first geographically removed from the scene of the crime. It is here that Morrison deals head-on with questions of distance from and access to power in a consumer society founded upon exploited labor.<br><br>	In Son’s estimation, all of Valerian’s wealth, created as it is from pilfered sugar, is nothing but raw sewage. The sole lesson of lives lived by Americans like Valerian Street is <br><br>how to make waste, how to make machines that made more waste, how to make wasteful products, how to talk waste, how to study waste, how to design waste, how to cure people who were sickened by waste so they could be well enough to endure it, how to mobilize waste, legalize waste and how to despise the culture that lived in cloth houses and shit on the ground far away from where they ate. (203-204)<br><br>Even here Son thinks about Valerian—“one of the killers of the world”—in terms of geography (204). Valerian has less dignity than wild animals who at least “did not eat where they defecated” (203). But Valerian, by retiring with his treasured possessions (including his wife and servants) to a Caribbean island, the source of his wealth, and then firing with “a flutter of the fingers” the people who had made that wealth possible, had defecated “over a whole people” (203). The effect of what the critic Alan Rice, looking at Morrison’s writing as exemplary of a jazz aesthetic, calls Morrison’s “waste riff” is to illustrate that white Americans “cannot ever been clean because of the dirt they have created in other cultures” (Rice 140). In Son’s mind these Americans “spent their whole lives bathing bathing bathing washing away the stench of the cesspools as though pure soap had anything to do with purity” (203). Signifyin(g) on Proctor & Gamble’s venerable Ivory soap brand (“99 – 44/100% pure” and “So pure it floats”), Son angrily connects American power to the source of that power—labor paid “according to some scale of value that would outrage Satan himself” (203)—and he imagines that the Americans’ disavowal of that labor will never be entirely successful.<br><br>	The depth of the rift between Valerian and Son assumes its most graphic manifestation within the minds of these two characters. Compare the two images that anchor Valerian and Son’s thoughts during their confrontation. Morrison writes:<br><br>Somewhere in the back of Valerian’s mind one hundred French chevaliers were roaming the hills on horses. Their swords were in their scabbards and their epaulets glittered in the sun. Backs straight, shoulders high—alert but restful in the security of the Napoleonic Code. (206)<br><br>Valerian stands self-righteous, an heir to the code of Napoleon, the modern world’s first civil legal system, but also a vestige of empire. Indignant over his questioned authority, Valerian protests, god-like, “I am being questioned by these people, as if, as if I could be called into question” (206). Valerian supposes that his authority reigns supreme, that it is his birthright, a legacy that he extends all the way back to Napoleon. Meanwhile <br><br>…in the back of Son’s mind one hundred black men on one hundred unshod horses rode blind and naked through the hills and had done so for hundreds of years. They knew the rain forest when it was a rain forest, they knew where the river began, where the roots twisted above the ground; they knew all there was to know about the island and had not even seen it. (206)<br><br>Son’s visualization is a counter to Valerian’s, a folk legend that is a more authentic, or at least a more autochthonic version of history than Valerian’s white-washed version. One might imagine these blind black horseman in Son’s mind being led by Toussaint L’Ouverture, the leader of the 1791 slave revolts in Haiti and ultimately an obstacle to Napoleon’s political ambitions in the Caribbean.<br><br>	Valerian’s imagined history of Isle des Chevaliers betrays his engagement with the politics of nation(al)ism, even as his retreat to a tropical island would seem to signal a separation from ideological distinctions presupposed by the concept of nation-states. In his mind French chevaliers roam the island, but Valerian’s inventive history is ultimately nothing more than a fable of self-aggrandizement, in which Valerian is the last of these noble knights, who alone must continue the project of colonialism begun hundreds of years earlier. Son’s version of the myth conversely underscores the truth about the Middle Passage. In contradistinction to Valerian, who chooses to live in the Caribbean, the blind slaves and their descendants in Son’s vision were uprooted from a land unaligned into national identities and undivided by geographic boundaries and were forcibly taken to another land where French forces sought to impose a rigid political structure. There, however, the slaves escaped both slavery and a colonial structure, which later ossified into a nation-state. The blind horsemen, ghosts or no, exist on a world map that has been deterritorialized.<br><br>	Valerian’s pretensions of ultimate but benevolent supremacy dissolve before his eyes as Son refuses to leave the house when Valerian orders him out. When Valerian shortly thereafter offends Ondine and she in turn insults his wife, he orders Ondine to leave as well. “It was the second time he ordered a dismissal,” Morrison writes, “and the second time it held no force” (207). What we are in the process of witnessing is the unraveling of Valerian’s power. Morrison demonstrates that much of Valerian’s power is power in appearance only and hence his is a power that can be challenged and resisted. Upon scrutiny, even Valerian’s name evokes only a superficial kind of power, what we might call the ruse of power. One need only consult a detailed history of the Roman Empire—which Valerian’s family certainly did not, while Morrison most certainly did—to find that, as Roman emperors go, Valerian was among the worst. He was already sixty when he became emperor of Rome, and he spent most of his reign either persecuting Christians or losing battles against the Persians. During one ill-fated battle Publius Licinius Valerianus was taken hostage by the Persians, and the old emperor eventually died in captivity (Cary and Scullard 509-511). <br><br>	This is a history that does not bode well for Valerian Street. Indeed, Morrison shows the subtle ways in which Valerian, even before his confrontation with Son, is less a ruler than he believes himself to be. It is Sydney who runs the household, making the arrangements for daily living, while Valerian vainly tends to his greenhouse flowers and classical records. After Valerian’s breakdown—brought on by the revelation that his wife had secretly tortured their infant son decades ago—he becomes a shell of himself, deflated, powerless. Furthermore, following Margaret’s confession of sadism his treasured island reverts back to its natural, wild state. Valerian’s greenhouse had previously been a “place of controlled ever-flowing life” (53), but now as Valerian stops pruning and preening the plants in his greenhouse they grow wild. When Jadine returns to the Isle des Chevaliers she “could hardly see L’Arbe de la Croix when they got to it, the trees leaned so close to the house” (276). Recall that visitors describe L’Arbe de la Croix as if it were a speech, a public address of some kind. It is now apparent that the statement the house makes is more than likely a eulogy. Despite the wilderness overtaking the house on the outside and the house’s pretensions to life, L’Arbe de la Croix (The Tree of the Cross) is mostly a lifeless thing. We see a foreshadowing of this with Morrison’s observation that the “house had a hotel feel about it—a kind of sooner or later leaving appearance” (12). The only “exception” was the kitchen, which “had a look of permanence” about it (12); this was where Ondine and her husband Sydney—the servants—did most of their living. While they live, Valerian slowly dies, if not a physical death, then a moral and spiritual death. At the very least, his presence on the Caribbean island is close to dissipating by the conclusion of the novel and the “Isle des Chevaliers filled in the spaces that had been the island’s to begin with” (242).<br><br>	The cause of Valerian’s fading presence is the discovery that for years his wife abused their son while he knew nothing and did nothing about it. Valerian had been ignorant and thereby complicit, and he found “something in the crime of innocence so revolting it paralyzed him” (242). The paradox of the situation, of course, is that only through the loss of innocence is the crime of innocence revealed. Throughout the novel Valerian is willfully ignorant about a number of things, from the names of his household employees to the abuse of his son. Morrison runs the risk here of collapsing a daily fact of capitalism onto a crisis of family life. That is, Margaret’s abuse of the infant Michael threatens to reduce Tar Baby to a melodrama essentially about family relations. Morrison succeeds in foregrounding the novel’s critique of capitalism, however, primarily by absenting Michael from the pages of the novel and substituting in his place the prodigal figure of Son. The transference works so much that when Valerian finally asks himself whether “there [is] anything so loathsome as a willfully innocent man?” we understand the question to be about Valerian’s relationship to those whose labor he exploits, even if he does not understand the question that way (243). The topography of privilege is founded upon such a state of innocence, in fact. As if to reinforce this point, Valerian continues to remain innocent about some of the fundamental workings of capitalism, disavowing at every turn the labor that makes his life possible. Morrison brilliantly highlights this disavowal in even the most mundane objects. For example, toward the end of the novel Margaret tells Jadine that Valerian, now a listless shadow of himself, has always refused to wear nylon, polyester, or any other synthetic fiber. “Everything he owns,” complains Margaret, “has to be made by Mother Nature” (277). Attributing the creation of his cotton, silk, and wool clothes to “Mother Nature,” Valerian erases the history of these materials as manufactured materials, woven with human hands and human sweat. <br><br>	For all of the mapping of the topography of privilege that Son triggers in Tar Baby, he is not without his failings. Perhaps the greatest obstacle to Son fulfilling his full potential as a critic of Valerian, Jadine, and the rest of their world is the very thing that sets Son apart: his homelessness and self-exile, an itinerancy bordering on vagrancy. Son proudly “prized fraternity” above all else  (205), but his idea of fraternity is limited to his experiences on “the ocean and in lockups…in tiny bars and shape-up halls” (168). It is fraternity without collectivity, a hollow brotherhood based on boats and booze. Son may be part of “that great underclass of undocumented men” (166), but he is not part of any political faction actually seeking change. Despite his convictions, Son does not belong to what Immanuel Wallerstein calls an “antisystemic movement.” Wallerstein defines an antisystemic movement simply as “a movement to transform the system”—the system being for Wallerstein the hegemony of the capitalist world economy (Wallerstein, Culture as the Ideological Battleground 285). There are many kinds of antisystemic movements (in the eighties Wallerstein broadly defined six types), but rather than bogging down in the particulars I prefer to avail myself of Edward Said’s gloss of antisystemic movements: “Those people compelled by the system to play subordinate or imprisoning roles within it emerge as conscious antagonists, disrupting it, proposing claims, advancing arguments that dispute the totalitarian compulsions of the world market” (Said 335). <br><br>	The power of an antisystemic movement lies in its collectivity, and through his involvement with Gideon and Thérèse, Son steps closer to fulfilling his potential as a member of an antisystemic movement. Much of Gideon and Thérèse’s own potential lies in the fact that they stand in opposition to dominant colonial structures. Although Gideon had become an American citizen during his years in the states, he was never truly a participant in the American political system. Forget the right to vote; for Gideon the only advantage of being an American citizen was “the ability to send an occasional ten-dollar money order, buy a leisure suit and watch TV” (109).  Gideon and Thérèse live on Dominique, but they lack a defining national identity. Clearly not Haitian, clearly not French, they are suspended in a denationalized space, one which Morrison valorizes in Tar Baby. Neither one thing nor another, they elude a rigorously defined national identity and are free to reimagine what it means to belong to a community. They are the opposite of Valerian, who is firmly rooted in a world where national identity matters. After all, he weighs French colonial taxes against American residential ones, but he cannot image a world without either. <br><br>	In contrast, Thérèse gives Son the opportunity to reimagine the idea of community at the end of the novel. Ferrying Son from Dominique to Isle des Chevaliers on a small motorboat, Thérèse urges to Son to consider the choice he faces when lands on the island. He can either travel across Isle des Chevaliers to search for Jadine at L’Arbe de la Croix or join the blind men on horseback. “They are waiting in the hills for you,” Thérèse tells Son.<br><br>“They are naked and they are blind too. I have seen them; their eyes have no color in them. But they gallop; they race those horses like angels all over the hills where the rain forest is, where the champion daisy trees still grow. Go there. Choose them.” (306)<br><br>The novel ends with Son running “Lickety-lickety-lickety-split” across the island, while the jungle trees “stepped back a bit as if to make the way easier for a certain kind of man” (306). Morrison has hinted strongly that despite the ambiguity of the conclusion, Son does choose  “the possibility of joining these rather incredible men in the rain forest” (Ruas 107). I propose that in running off to join the horsemen on the island Son is poised to join a movement greater than himself, what I like to think of as an antisystemic movement. Urged on by Thérèse, Son is finally mobilizing himself in a way that Jadine, who has “forgotten her ancient properties” (305), never does in the novel. Son is a “certain kind of man” and I imagine that among the horsemen he finds allies with whom he can continue his struggle against Valerian and the hegemonic system he represents, a struggle that continues despite Son’s exile, a struggle that might ultimately reshape the topography of privilege that now divides Americans from Americans and America from the world.<br><br>COMMUNITIES OF RESISTANCE	<br><br>And so we have come full circle. Whereas the troupe of terrorists in “The Uniforms” evades history, Son in Tar Baby joins history, allying himself with ghostly facts of historical world capitalism. One way to think about the antisystemic movement Son is poised to join at the end of Tar Baby is as what bell hooks calls a “community of resistance” (hooks 12). Communities of resistance, hooks writes, are “places where we know we are not alone” (hooks and West 17). Such communities, Cornel West elaborates in a conversation with hooks, are sites of struggle and solidarity, places where the disenchanted, and often disenfranchised, can find their “sense of home” (hooks and West 18). Not all communities provide this sense of home, as Morrison demonstrates time and time again. This is essentially the message, for example, of Paradise (1997), in which the one community that does provide for the women in it a sense of home is brutally invaded and destroyed by the men of another community, the town of Ruby, Oklahoma. And in Sula (1973), the rebel Sula is upbraided by and ostracized from her judgmental community in northern Ohio. Even Pecola in The Bluest Eye might have been saved had her community taken more than a passing interest in her. As it is, she is last seen wandering insane among the trash in the neighborhood dump, “between the tire rims and the sunflowers, between Coke bottles and milkweed, among all the waste and beauty of the world” (Bluest Eye 205). In such circumstances, ignored or cast aside by society, there is no hope of finding a sense of home. <br><br>	If Son appears in the epilogue to be navigating his way toward a community of resistance, what about Jadine, his abandoned pursuit? Jadine is no Son, but nor is she a Pecola. En route to Paris, Jadine is facing a future even more ambiguous than Son’s, a point often ignored by critics, who are unsettled by Son’s fate, but interestingly enough, not by Jadine’s. Morrison provides no clues about what Jadine seeks and ultimately finds in Paris. A husband in Ryk? A return to modeling in Europe, where “they liked older –looking black models” (267)? Or possibly a “tangle with the woman in yellow,” as Jadine vows in one of her more determined moments (290)? Regardless of her options, Jadine is most certainly not joining any kind of meaningful community, let alone a community of resistance. In New York and Paris Jadine’s worth is a function of her physical appearance, and her return to the metropolitan life signals a return to the world of surfaces, where her body is essentially an advertisement, for clothes, for jewelry, for beauty. Thus in another way Tar Baby brings my project full circle: a return to the domain of bright and brilliant packages. Morrison astutely balances Jadine’s return with an implicit statement about the world to which she returns: Jadine’s very inability to escape this world translates into one of the most condemning attacks yet of consumer culture in the novel; without a supportive community, an individual struggling alone will often fail to resist the market mentality that debases what Morrison calls in her dedication to Tar Baby one’s “true and ancient properties” (vii).<br><br>	With Jadine’s flight from the Caribbean she leaves behind the past, renouncing the legacies of postcolonial relations as much as Son embraces them. Jadine leaves the past and heads…toward the future, to the eighties. Morrison wrote Tar Baby in the late seventies, and it is worthwhile to consider Tar Baby as a transitional novel, one that anticipates Ronald Reagan’s American eighties, embodied by Jadine. This is a point Julia Emberley makes in a reading of Tar Baby informed by Frantz Fanon’s critique of white enlightenment rationality. “Jadine Childs,” Emberley writes, “represents middle-class ideals of beauty and education; her character anticipates the rise of a new elitism in the U.S. during Ronald Reagan’s presidency” (Emberley 407). Emberley contends that under Reaganism “race, gender, sexual, and ethnic differences would function as signs of symbolic power, not collective political power” (407). In other words, to crudely overstate Emberley’s case, identity politics, when all was said and done, was barely politics at all. The atmosphere of Reagan’s America encouraged the discourse of difference, but defused any sustained collectivity that might emerge from such discourse. To take Emberley’s point further, multiculturalism in the eighties ultimately fell prey to the overwhelming logic of consumer culture, and activism was replaced by signage and symbolism. Hence the legacy of, say, the Black Power movement or “Women’s Lib,” is evidenced in the lifestyles trends, fashion choices, and consumer habits of the majority more than in any tangible political gain for those in the minority.<br><br>	Son resists this market-driven reappropriation of cultural resistance. Jadine does not. Son’s struggle toward collectivity (a ghostly collectivity, but collectivity nonetheless, imbued with spirituality) is perhaps a legacy of the sixties and seventies. Jadine’s disavowal of power relations and possible reclamation of her status as “Copper Venus” points to the eighties. Ironically, a blurb on the back cover of the first paperback edition of Tar Baby reinstates the spirit of consumer capitalism that Morrison radicalizes in her novel, and in doing so points to the nascent decade emerging at the time. Excerpted from a Newsweek review of Tar Baby, the blurb reads: <br><br>Morrison’s genius lies in her uncanny ability to immerse you totally in the world she creates. Her novel keeps you turning pages as if to find out who killed J.R. (Tar Baby, First Signet Printing, April, 1983, back cover)<br><br>Literary critics rarely pay attention to the blurbs on book covers. The author rarely has any input over these paratextual fragments and they almost always offer no significant insight into the novel itself. But this particular blurb is especially instructive. Beyond all reason, the Newsweek reviewer links Morrison’s radically-charged novel to what should be its antithesis, the American primetime soap Dallas, the show that established the very paradigm of eighties capitalism. More specifically, the blurb recalls the now-legendary cliffhanger of the 1979-1980 season, in which an unknown assailant gunned down J.R. Ewing, the devilish Dallas oilman, played in the long-running series by Larry Hagman. <br><br>	The Newsweek  reviewer is apparently as obtuse a television viewer as he is a book critic. Nobody killed J.R.  During the summer of 1980 the question that circulated endlessly across America was “Who shot J.R.?” For J.R. Ewing, like the Machiavellian no-holds-barred capitalism he represented, was not fatally wounded, and he went on to live through the eighties, until the last episode of the last season of Dallas in 1991. It is worth noting that the May 3, 1991 series finale of Dallas, “Conundrum,” concluded with J.R. poised to commit suicide after he had lost everything he held dear: his oil business, his ranch, his family. In the episode’s final scenes, J.R. is shown holding a gun to his head, and the camera cuts to his brother Bobby’s startled face as the sound of a gunshot rings out. This ending—the apparent death of J.R. by his own hands—would seem to be the ultimate critique of the ruthless capitalism he represented and a fitting end to the eighties; in the end, the episode seems to say, such viciousness consumes itself. However, in a Dallas television movie broadcast on November 15, 1996, it is revealed that J.R. had not killed himself and that he was now in fact hard at work reconsolidating his power.  And so, the producers of Dallas revoke the series finale’s critique of eighties capitalism, suggesting instead that capitalism may periodically lie dormant, but it will always reemerge, often with a vengeance, to seek out new markets, new avenues of expansion and control. <br><br>	Dallas can be understood as shorthand for Reagan’s eighties—a paragon of glamour, glitz, wealth, power, and more to the point, an excess of all these. Tar Baby, through a careless reviewer’s blind insight, materializes as Morrison’s preemptive response to that decade. In her illuminating novel, Morrison cracks open the violent history of American consumer culture, showing its dehumanizing effects on both its producers and its consumers, its workers and its bourgeoisie. As for the future—the future of her characters, and the future of the country—Morrison imagines several paths. Down one lies the possibility of resistance, a continuing radicalization of American consumers. Down the other, the one that stretches toward the triumph of a market mentality, lies a mystery that Morrison’s readers, like Jadine herself, must confront and for which we must supply our own answers.<br><br>BIBLIOGRAPHY<br><br>“2 Men Leap from Office Windows in Flaming Building.” Lorain Journal 18 August 1947.<br><br>Als, Hinton. “Ghosts in the House.” New Yorker 27 October 2003: 64-75.<br><br>Althusser, Louis. Lenin and Philosophy, and Other Essays. Trans. Ben Brewster. London: New Left Books, 1971.<br><br>Arrighi, Giovanni. The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times. New York: Verso, 1994.<br><br>Baker, Houston A., Jr. Long Black Song: Essays in Black American Literature and Culture. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1972.<br><br>Bakhtin, M.M. The Dialogic Imagination. Trans. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Ed. Michael Holquist. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.<br><br>Barnard, Rita. The Great Depression and the Culture of Abundance: Kenneth Fearing, Nathanael West, and Mass Culture in the 1930s. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1995.<br><br>Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of the Mind. New York: Ballantine, 1972.<br><br>Baughman, James L. Henry R. Luce and the Rise of the American News Media. Boston: Twayne, 1987.<br><br>Benjamin, Ludy T., Jr. , and Ellen M. Crouse. “The American Psychological Association’s Response to Brown v. Board of Education.” American Psychologist 57.1 (2002): 38-50.<br><br>Benjamin, Walter. The Arcades Project. Trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin McLaughlin. Ed. Rolf Tiedemann. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap-Harvard UP, 1999.<br><br>---. Illuminations: Essays and Reflections. Trans. Harry Zohn. Ed. Hanna Arendt. New York: Schocken Books, 1968.<br><br>---. Selected Writings, 1913-1926. Ed. Marcus Bullock and Michael W. Jennings. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap-Harvard UP, 1996.<br><br>Black, Shirley Temple. Child Star: An Autobiography. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1988.<br><br>Bowlby, Rachel. Carried Away: The Invention of Modern Shopping. New York: Columbia UP, 2001.<br><br>Brown, Bill. “How to Do Things with Things (A Toy Story).” Critical Inquiry 24 (1998): 935-964.<br><br>Browne, Malcolm W. Reporting America at War. PBS. 22 February 2004. <http://www.pbs.org/weta/reportingamericaatwar/reporters/browne/protests.html>.<br><br>Buck-Morss, Susan. The Dialectics of Seeing: Walter Benjamin and the Arcades Project. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1991.<br><br>Caputi, Jane. “‘Specifying’ Fannie Hurst: Langston Hughes’s ‘Limitations of Life,’ Zora Neale Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God, and Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye as ‘Answers’ to Hurst’s Imitation of Life.” Black American Literature Forum 24 (1990): 697-716.<br><br>Cary, Max, and Howard H. Scullard. A History of Rome: Down to the Reign of Constantine. 3rd ed. New York: Bedford-St. Martin’s, 1976.<br><br>Central Intelligence Agency. “Martinique.” The World Factbook. 20 June 2004. 1 January 2004. <http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/mb.html>.<br><br>Chin, Elizabeth. Purchasing Power: Black Kids and American Consumer Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2001.<br><br>Clark, Kenneth B. Prejudice and Your Child. Boston: Beacon Press, 1963.<br><br>Clark, Kenneth B., and Mamie P. Clark. “Racial Identification and Preference in Negro Children.” Readings in Social Psychology. Eds. Eleanor E. Maccoby, Theodore M. Newcomb and Eugene L. Hartley. 3rd ed. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1958. 602-611. <br><br>Coleman, James. “The Quest for Wholeness in Toni Morrison’s Tar Baby.” Black American Literature Forum 20.1-2 (1986): 63-73.<br><br>Cowart, David. Don DeLillo: The Physics of Language. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2002.<br><br>De Lancey, Dayle B. “Sweetness, Madness, and Power: The Confection as Mental Contagion in Toni Morrison’s Tar Baby, Song of Solomon, and The Bluest Eye.” In Process 2 (2000): 25-47.<br><br>DeCurtis, Anthony. “‘An Outsider in This Society’: An Interview with Don DeLillo.” South Atlantic Quarterly 89 (1990): 281-304.<br><br>DeLillo, Don. Reading of Cosmopolis. Free Library of Philadelphia. 24 April 2003.<br><br>---. Americana. New York: Penguin Books, 1989.<br><br>---. Appendix [“The Uniforms”]. Cutting Edges: Young American Fiction for the ’70s. Ed. Jack Hicks. New York: Holt, 1973. 532-533. <br><br>---. Cosmopolis. New York: Scribner, 2003.<br><br>---. Great Jones Street. New York: Penguin Putnam, 1994.<br><br>---. Letter to the author. 27 April 2003.<br><br>---. Libra. New York: Viking, 1988.<br><br>---. Players. New York: Vintage-Random, 1984.<br><br>---. Underworld. New York: Scribner, 1997.<br><br>---. “The Uniforms.” Cutting Edges: Young American Fiction for the ’70s. Ed. Jack Hicks. New York: Holt, 1973. 451-459. <br><br>---. White Noise. New York: Viking-Penguin, 1985.<br><br>“Dreamland Theatre to Re-open Thursday.” Lorain Journal 7 April 1948.<br><br>Du Bois, W. E. B. The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Penguin, 1989.<br><br>DuCille, Ann. Skin Trade. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996.<br><br>Eckard, Paula Gallant. Maternal Body and Voice in Toni Morrison, Bobbie Ann Mason, and Lee Smith. Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 2002.<br><br>Edwards, Anne. Shirley Temple: American Princess. New York: William Morrow & Company, 1988.<br><br>Emberley, Julia V. “A Historical Transposition: Toni Morrison’s Tar Baby and Frantz Fanon’s Post Enlightenment Phantasms.” Modern Fiction Studies 45.2 (1999): 403-431.<br><br>Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks. Trans. Charles Lam Markmann. New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1967.<br><br>Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New York: Vintage-Random House, 1977.<br><br>Franklin, Benjamin. The Works of Benjamin Franklin. Ed. Jared Sparks. Vol. X. Boston: Hilliard, Gray, and Company, 1840.<br><br>Gaines, Jane M. Contested Culture: The Image, The Voice, and The Law. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991.<br><br>Gates, Henry Louis Jr. Figures in Black: Words, Signs, and the ‘Racial’ Self. New York: Oxford UP, 1987.<br><br>Gerster, Carole J. “From Film Margin to Novel Center: Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye.” West Virginia University Philological Papers 38 (1992): 191-200.<br><br>Gilborn, Craig. “Pop Pedagogy: Looking at the Coke Bottle.” Material Culture Studies in America. Ed. Thomas J. Schlereth. Nashville, Tenn.: American Association for State and Local History, 1982. 183-191. <br><br>Gillespie, Angus Kress. Twin Towers: The Life of New York City’s World Trade Center. Piscataway: Rutgers University Press, 1999.<br><br>Green, Peter S. “Student’s Suicide Leads Czechs to Bout of Soul-Searching.” New York Times 12 March 2003, Late ed.: A4.<br><br>Gutis, Philip S. “The End Begins for Trash No One Wanted.” New York Times 2 September 1987, final ed.: B1.<br><br>Haley, Alex, and Malcolm X. The Autobiography of Malcolm X. New York: Ballantine, 1992.<br><br>Hall, Stuart. “Encoding, Decoding.” The Cultural Studies Reader. Ed. Simon During. New York: Routledge, 1993. 90-103. <br><br>Harris, Daniel. Cute, Quaint, Hungry, and Romantic: The Aesthetics of Consumerism. Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 2001.<br><br>Harvey, David. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1989.<br><br>Hawthorne, Evelyn. “On Gaining the Double-Vision: Tar Baby as Diasporean Novel.” Black American Literature Forum 22.1 (1988): 97-107.<br><br>Heinze, Denise. The Dilemma of ‘Double-Consciousness’: Toni Morrison’s Novels. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1993.<br><br>Hine, Thomas. The Total Package: The Secret History and Hidden Meanings of Boxes, Bottles, Cans and Other Persuasive Containers. New York: Little Brown & Company, 1997.<br><br>History of Lorain, Ohio. Lorain Public Library. 27 February 2004. <http://www.lorain.lib.oh.us/history/community/L_Chronology4.html>.<br><br>Hobsbawm, Eric. Bandits. New York: Delacorte, 1969.<br><br>hooks, bell. Teaching Community: A Pedagogy of Hope. New York: Routledge, 2003.<br><br>hooks, bell, and Cornel West. Breaking Bread: Insurgent Black Intellectual Life. Boston: South End Press, 1991.<br><br>Hopps, Walter, et al. Robert Rauschenberg: A Retrospective. New York: Guggenheim Museum, 1998.<br><br>Hunt, Gaillard. The History of the Seal of the United States. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1909.<br><br>Hutcheon, Linda. A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, Fiction. New York: Routledge, 1988.<br><br>Jameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham: Duke UP, 1991.<br><br>Johnson, Diane. “Beyond Radical Chic.” New York Times 4  September 1977: 153-154.<br><br>Kaufman, Michael T. “What Does the Pentagon See in ‘Battle of Algiers’?” New York Times 7 September 2003, late ed.: sec. 4, p. 3.<br><br>Keck, Leander E., ed. New Interpreter’s Bible: Matthew-Mark. Vol. 8. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1995.<br><br>Keller, Amy. “Senators Get Golf Course Warning.” Roll Call 21 October 2002.<br><br>Kirby, Ian and Maggie Hall. “Bin Laden Sniper Alert in 50 Cities.” News of the World. CNN. 20 October 2002. Transcript.<br><br>Kopytoff, Igor. “The Cultural Biography of Things: Commoditization as Process.” The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspectives. Ed. Arjun Appadurai. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1986. 64-91. <br><br>Kotz, Mary Lynn. Rauschenberg: Art and Life. New York: H. N. Abrams, 1990.<br><br>Kristeva, Julia. Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection. Trans. Leon S. Roudiez. New York: Columbia University Press, 1982.<br><br>Lacan, Jacques. “The Mirror Stage as Formative of the Function of the I.” Trans. Alan Sheridan. Écrits: A Selection. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1977. 1-7. <br><br>LeClair, Thomas. “The Language Must Not Sweat: A Conversation with Toni Morrison.” Conversations with Toni Morrison. Ed. Danille Taylor-Guthrie. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1994. 119-128. <br><br>LeClair, Tom. In the Loop: Don DeLillo and the Systems Novel. Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1987.<br><br>---. “An Interview with Don DeLillo.” Anything Can Happen: Interviews with Contemporary American Novelists. Ed. Tom LeClair and Larry McCaffery. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1983. 79-90. <br><br>Livingstone, Marco. Pop Art: A Continuing History. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2000.<br><br>Mamber, Stephen. “Narrative Mapping.” New Media: Theories and Practices of Digitextuality. Eds. Anna Everett and John T. Caldwell. New York: Routledge, 2003. 145-158. <br><br>Maresca, Frank, and Roger Ricco. William Hawkings. New York: Knopf, 1997.<br><br>Marshall, Alexandra. “Guerilla Marketing.” New York Times Magazine 9 March 2003: 52-53.<br><br>Matthews, Glenna. American Women’s History: A Student Companion. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.<br><br>McKay, Nellie. “An Interview with Toni Morrison.” Conversations with Toni Morrison. Ed. Danille Taylor-Guthrie. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1994. 138-155. <br><br>Mercer, Kobena. “Black Hair/Style Politics.” Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures. Ed. Russell Ferguson, et al. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990. 247-264. <br><br>Merish, Lori. “Cuteness and Commodity Aesthetics: Tom Thumb and Shirley Temple.” Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body. Ed. Rosemarie Garland Thomson. New York: New York University Press, 1996. 185-203. <br><br>Mintz, Sidney W. Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History. New York: Viking, 1985.<br><br>Morrison, Toni. Afterword. The Bluest Eye. New York: Plume, 1994. 207-216. <br><br>---. The Bluest Eye. New York: Plume, 1994.<br><br>---. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. New York: Vintage, 1992.<br><br>---. “Rootedness: The Ancestor as Foundation.” Black Women Writers (1950-1980): A Critical Evaluation. Ed. Mari Evans. Garden City: Anchor-Doubleday, 1984. 339-345. <br><br>---. Tar Baby. New York: Signet, 1982.<br><br>---. Tar Baby. New York: Vintage, 2004.<br><br>Mulvey, Laura. “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.” Feminism and Film Theory. Ed. Constance Penley. New York: Routledge, 1988. 57-68. <br><br>“New Dreamland Opens Doors to Public Thursday.” Lorain Journal 25 November 1936.<br><br>“New Season.” Time 19 August 1935: 26-28.<br><br>New York State Special Commission on Attica. The Official Report of the New York State Special Commission on Attica. New York: Praeger, 1972.<br><br>Nye, David E. American Technological Sublime. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996.<br><br>O’Day, Gail R., and David Peterson, eds. Access Bible: New Revised Standard Version. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.<br><br>Osteen, Mark. American Magic and Dread: Don DeLillo’s Dialogue with Culture. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000.<br><br>Owens, Craig. Beyond Recognition: Representation, Power, and Culture. Eds. Scott Bryson, et al. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.<br><br>Passaro, Vince. “Dangerous Don DeLillo.” New York Times Magazine 19 May 1991: 34-38+.<br><br>Patell, Cyrus R. K. Negative Liberties: Morrison, Pynchon, and the Problem of Liberal Ideology. Durham: Duke University Press, 2001.<br><br>“Peewee’s Progress.” Time 27 April 1936: 36-44.<br><br>Pendergrast, Mark. For God, Country, and Coca-Cola: The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It. New York: Scribner, 1993.<br><br>Pérez Firmat, Gustavo. “I’m Cuban—What’s Your Excuse?” Davidson College. 17 April 2003.<br><br>Rexer, Lyle. “William Hawkins.” Raw Vision 45 (2003): 22-29.<br><br>Rice, Alan. “Erupting Funk: The Political Style of Toni Morrison’s Tar Baby and The Bluest Eye.” Post-Colonial Literatures: Expanding the Canon. Ed. Deborah L. Madsen. London: Pluto Press, 1999. 133-147. <br><br>Robins, Anthony W. The World Trade Center. Sarasota: Pineapple Press, 1987.<br><br>Robinson, Eugene. “The Eyes of A Revolution; Korda’s Cuba Photographs on View at Govinda Gallery.” Washington Post 28 June 2001, final ed.: C1.<br><br>Ruas, Charles. “Toni Morrison.” Conversations with Toni Morrison. Ed. Danille Taylor-Guthrie. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1994. 93-118. <br><br>Rushdie, Salman. The Satanic Verses. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1997.<br><br>Said, Edward W. Culture and Imperialism. New York: Vintage-Random House, 1994.<br><br>“Sardonian.” The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989. <br><br>Schlesinger, Stephen, and Stephen Kinzer. Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala. Garden City: Doubleday, 1982.<br><br>Schreiber, Evelyn Jaffe. Subversive Voices: Eroticizing the Other in William Faulkner and Toni Morrison. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2001.<br><br>Schulman, Bruce J. The Seventies: The Great Shift in American Culture, Society and Politics. New York: Free Press-Simon & Schuster, 2001.<br><br>Schwindler, Gary. “William Hawkins: Master Storyteller.” Raw Vision 4 (1991): 40-45.<br><br>---. “You Want to See Somethin’ Pretty?” William Hawkins. Eds. Frank Maresca and Roger Ricco. New York: Knopf, 1997. v-ix. <br><br>Smith, Patrick S. Warhol: Conversations about the Artist. Studies in the Fine Arts: The Avant-Gard. Ed. Stephen C. Foster. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI, 1988.<br><br>Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Anchor-Doubleday, 1989.<br><br>Stallybrass, Peter, and Allon White. The Politics and Poetics of Transgression. New York: Cornell UP, 1986.<br><br>Stephens, Henry A. “Visiting United Fruit Company Banana Plantations.” Coca-Cola Overseas June 1957: 18-21.<br><br>Stich, Sidra. Made in U.S.A.: An Americanization in Modern Art, The ’50s & ’60s. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.<br><br>Striffler, Steve. In the Shadows of State and Capital: The United Fruit Company, Popular Struggle, and Agrarian Restructuring in Ecuador, 1900-1995. Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.<br><br>Susman, Warren. Culture as History: The Transformation of American Society in the Twentieth Century. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984.<br><br>Tagg, John. The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photographies and Histories. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1988.<br><br>Thaggert, Miriam. “Divided Images: Black Female Spectatorship and John Stahl’s Imitation of Life.” African American Review 32 (1998): 481-491.<br><br>Tomkins, Calvin. “Art or Not, It’s Food for Thought.” Life 20 November 1964: 143-144.<br><br>Trachtenberg, Alan. Reading American Photographs: Images as History, Matthew Brady to Walker Evans. New York: Hill and Wang, 1989.<br><br>Truffaut, François. Hitchcock. Revised ed. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985.<br><br>Turner, Victor. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1969.<br><br>Vered, Karen Orr. “White and Black in Black and White: Management of Race and Sexuality in the Coupling of Child-Star Shirley Temple and Bill Robinson.” Velvet Light Trap 39 (1997): 52-65.<br><br>Von Eckardt, Wolf. “New York’s Trade Center: World’s Tallest Fiasco.” Harper’s May 1966: 94-100.<br><br>Wallerstein, Immanuel. The Capitalist World-Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1979.<br><br>---. “Culture as the Ideological Battleground.” The Essential Wallerstein. New York: The New Press, 2000. 264-289. <br><br>Warhol, Andy. The Philosophy of Andy Warhol: From A to B and Back Again. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975.<br><br>Weinstein, Philip M. What Else But Love: The Ordeal of Race in Faulkner and Morrison. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.<br><br>Williams, Lisa. The Artist as Outsider in the Novels of Toni Morrison and Virginia Woolf. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 2000.<br><br>Williams, Raymond. “Advertising: The Magic System.” The Cultural Studies Reader. Ed. Simon During. New York: Routledge, 1993. 320-336. <br><br>Willis, Susan. A Primer for Daily Life. New York: Routledge, 1991.<br><br>---. Specifying: Black Women Writing the American Experience. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1987.<br><br>Wilson, Judith. “A Conversation with Toni Morrison.” Conversations with Toni Morrison. Ed. Danille Taylor-Guthrie. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1994. 129-137. <br><br>Wilson, Sherryl. Oprah, Celebrity and Formations of Self. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.<br><br>“The World of Toni Morrison.” Essence May 1995: 222-224+.<br><br>Žižek, Slavoj. The Sublime Object of Ideology. New York: Verso, 1989.<br><br>RADICALIZING CONSUMPTION IN THE FICTION <br>OF DON DELILLO AND TONI MORRISON<br><br>Mark L. Sample<br>CC-BY-SA